THE HAPPY PRINCE
High above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy Prince.
He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his sword-hilt.
He was very much admired indeed.
"He is as beautiful as a weathercock," remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for having artistic tastes; "only not quite so useful," he added, fearing lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.
"Why can't you be like the Happy Prince?" asked a sensible mother of her little boy who was crying for the moon.
"The Happy Prince never dreams of crying for anything."
"I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy," muttered a disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.
 "He looks just like an angel," said the Charity Children as they came out of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean white pinafores.
"How do you know?" said the Mathematical Master, "you have never seen one."
"Ah! but we have, in our dreams," answered the children; and the Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not approve of children dreaming.
One night there flew over the city a little Swallow.
His friends had gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he was in love with the most beautiful Reed.
He had met her early in the spring as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had been so attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to her.
"Shall I love you?" said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at once, and the Reed made him a low bow.
So he flew round and round her, touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples.
This was his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.
"It is a ridiculous attachment," twittered the other Swallows; "she has no money, and far too many relations"; and indeed the river was quite full of Reeds.
Then, when the autumn came they all flew away.
After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his ladylove.
"She has no conversation," he said, "and I am afraid that she is a coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind."
And certainly, whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys.
"I admit that she is domestic," he continued, "but I love travelling, and my wife, consequently, should love travelling also."
"Will you come away with me?" he said finally to her; but the Reed shook her head, she was so attached to her home.
"You have been trifling with me," he cried.
"I am off to the Pyramids. Good-bye!" and he flew away.
All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city.
"Where shall I put up?" he said; "I hope the town has made preparations."
Then he saw the statue on the tall column.
"I will put up there," he cried; "it is a fine position, with plenty of fresh air." 
So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.
"I have a golden bedroom," he said softly to himself as he looked round, and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under his wing a large drop of water fell on him.
"What a curious thing!" he cried; "there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are quite clear and bright, and yet it is raining.
The climate in the north of Europe is really dreadful.
The Reed used to like the rain, but that was merely her selfishness."
Then another drop fell.
"What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off?" he said; "I must look for a good chimney-pot," and he determined to fly away.
But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up, and saw--Ah! what did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were running down his golden cheeks.
His face was so beautiful in the moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.
"Who are you?" he said.
"I am the Happy Prince."
"Why are you weeping then?" asked the Swallow; "you have quite drenched me."
"When I was alive and had a human heart," answered the statue, "I did not know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of SansSouci, where sorrow is not allowed to enter.
In the daytime I played with my companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the Great Hall.
Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to ask what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful.
My courtiers called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if pleasure be happiness.
So I lived, and so I died.
And now that I am dead they have set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all the misery of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot chose but weep."
"What! is he not solid gold?" said the Swallow to himself.
He was too polite to make any personal remarks out loud.
"Far away," continued the statue in a low musical voice, "far away in a little street there is a poor house.
One of the windows is open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table.
Her face is thin and worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she is a seamstress.
She is embroidering passionflowers on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen's maids-ofhonour to wear at the next Court-ball.
In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying ill.
He has a fever, and is asking for oranges.
His mother has nothing to give him but river water, so he is crying.
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?
My feet are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move."
"I am waited for in Egypt," said the Swallow.
"My friends are flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotusflowers.
Soon they will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.
The King is there himself in his painted coffin.
He is wrapped in yellow linen, and embalmed with spices.
Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and his hands are like withered leaves."
"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not stay with me for one night, and be my messenger?
The boy is so thirsty, and the mother so sad."
"I don't think I like boys," answered the Swallow.
"Last summer, when I was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller's sons, who were always throwing stones at me.
They never hit me, of course; we swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect."
But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
"It is very cold here," he said; "but I will stay with you for one night, and be your messenger."
"Thank you, little Swallow," said the Prince.
So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince's sword, and flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.
He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were sculptured.
He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing.
A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.
"How wonderful the stars are," he said to her, "and how wonderful is the power of love!"
"I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball," she answered; "I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but the seamstresses are so lazy."
He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of the ships.
He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales.
At last he came to the poor house and looked in.
The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired. In he hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman's thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy's forehead with his wings.
"How cool I feel," said the boy, "I must be getting better"; and he sank into a delicious slumber.
Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had done.
"It is curious," he remarked, "but I feel quite warm now, although it is so cold."
"That is because you have done a good action," said the Prince.
And the little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep.
Thinking always made him sleepy.
When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.
"What a remarkable phenomenon," said the Professor of Ornithology as he was passing over the bridge.
"A swallow in winter!"
And he wrote a long letter about it to the local newspaper.
Every one quoted it, it was full of so many words that they could not understand.
"To-night I go to Egypt," said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits at the prospect.
He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long time on top of the church steeple.
Wherever he went the Sparrows chirruped, and said to each other, "What a distinguished stranger!" so he enjoyed himself very much.
When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
"Have you any commissions for Egypt?" he cried; "I am just starting."
"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not stay with me one night longer?"
"I am waited for in Egypt," answered the Swallow.
"To-morrow my friends will fly up to the Second Cataract.
The river-horse couches there among the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon.
All night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent.
At noon the yellow lions come down to the water's edge to drink.
They have eyes like green beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract. "Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "far away across the city I see a young man in a garret.
He is leaning over a desk covered with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of withered violets.
His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.
He is trying to finish a play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any more.
There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint."
"I will wait with you one night longer," said the Swallow, who really had a good heart. "Shall I take him another ruby?"
"Alas! I have no ruby now," said the Prince; "my eyes are all that I have left.
They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of India a thousand years ago.
Pluck out one of them and take it to him.
He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish his play."
"Dear Prince," said the Swallow, "I cannot do that"; and he began to weep.
"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "do as I command you."
So the Swallow plucked out the Prince's eye, and flew away to the student's garret.
It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in the roof.
Through this he darted, and came into the room.
The young man had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the bird's
wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying on the withered violets.
"I am beginning to be appreciated," he cried; "this is from some great admirer.
Now I can finish my play," and he looked quite happy.
The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbour. He sat on the mast of a large vessel and
watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the hold with ropes.
"Heave a-hoy!" they shouted as each chest came up.
"I am going to Egypt"! cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
"I am come to bid you good-bye," he cried.
"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not stay with me one night longer?"
"It is winter," answered the Swallow, "and the chill snow will soon be here.
In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.
My companions are building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves are watching them, and cooing to each other.
Dear Prince, I must leave you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away.
The ruby shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as the great sea."
"In the square below," said the Happy Prince, "there stands a little match-girl.
She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all spoiled.
Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money, and she is crying.
She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is bare.
Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will not beat her." 
"I will stay with you one night longer," said the Swallow, "but I cannot pluck out your eye.
You would be quite blind then."
"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "do as I command you."
So he plucked out the Prince's other eye, and darted down with it.
He swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her hand.
"What a lovely bit of glass," cried the little girl; and she ran home, laughing.
Then the Swallow came back to the Prince.
"You are blind now," he said, "so I will stay with you always."
"No, little Swallow," said the poor Prince, "you must go away to Egypt."
"I will stay with you always," said the Swallow, and he slept at the Prince's feet.
All the next day he sat on the Prince's shoulder, and told him stories of what he had seen in strange lands.
He told him of the red ibises, who stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch gold-fish in their beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in the desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by the side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the King of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and worships a large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a palm-tree, and has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of the pygmies who sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are always at war with the butterflies.
"Dear little Swallow," said the Prince, "you tell me of marvellous things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and of women.
There is no Mystery so great as Misery.
Fly over my city, little Swallow, and tell me what you see there."
So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.
He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children looking out listlessly at the black streets.
Under the archway of a bridge two little boys were lying in one another's arms to try and keep themselves warm.
"How hungry we are!" they said.
"You must not lie here," shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.
Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.
"I am covered with fine gold," said the Prince, "you must take it off, leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold can make them happy."
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy Prince looked quite dull and grey.
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he brought to the poor, and the children's faces grew rosier, and they laughed and played games in the street.
"We have bread now!" they cried.
Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost.
The streets looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves of the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore scarlet caps and skated on the ice. 
The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave the Prince, he loved him too well.
He picked up crumbs outside the baker's door when the baker was not looking and tried to keep himself warm by flapping his wings.
But at last he knew that he was going to die. He had just strength to fly up to the Prince's shoulder once more.
"Good-bye, dear Prince!" he murmured, "will you let me kiss your hand?"
"I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow," said the Prince, "you have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the lips, for I love you."
"It is not to Egypt that I am going," said the Swallow.
"I am going to the House of Death.
Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?"
And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his feet.
At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something had broken.
The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two.
It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.
Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in company with the Town Councillors.
As they passed the column he looked up at the statue: "Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!" he said.
"How shabby indeed!" cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.
"The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is golden no longer," said the Mayor in fact, "he is litttle beter than a beggar!"
"Little better than a beggar," said the Town Councillors.
"And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!" continued the Mayor.
"We must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed to die here."
And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.
So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince.
"As he is no longer beautiful he is no longer useful," said the Art Professor at the University.
Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting of the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal.
"We must have another statue, of course," he said, "and it shall be a statue of myself."
"Of myself," said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarrelling still.
"What a strange thing!" said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
"This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace.
We must throw it away."
So they threw it on a dust-heap where the dead Swallow was also lying.
"Bring me the two most precious things in the city," said God to one of His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird.
"You have rightly chosen," said God, "for in my garden of Paradise this little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy Prince shall praise me."
THE NIGHTINGALE AND THE ROSE

"She said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses," cried the young Student; "but in all my garden there is no red rose."
From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and she looked out through the leaves, and wondered.
"No red rose in all my garden!" he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled with tears.
"Ah, on what little things does happiness depend! I have read all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of philosophy are mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made wretched."
"Here at last is a true lover," said the Nightingale.
"Night after night have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I told his story to the stars, and now I see him.
His hair is dark as the hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal upon his brow."
"The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night," murmured the young Student, "and my love will be of the company.
If I bring her a red rose she will dance with me till dawn.
If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold her in my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her hand will be clasped in mine.
But there is no red rose in my garden, so I shall sit lonely, and she will pass me by.
She will have no heed of me, and my heart will break."
"Here indeed is the true lover," said the Nightingale.
"What I sing of, he suffers--what is joy to me, to him is pain.
Surely Love is a wonderful thing.
It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine opals.
Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the marketplace.
It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be weighed out in the balance for gold."
"The musicians will sit in their gallery," said the young Student, "and play upon their stringed instruments, and my love will dance to the sound of the harp and the violin.
She will dance so lightly that her feet will not touch the floor, and the courtiers in their gay dresses will throng round her.
But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose to give her"; and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his face in his hands, and wept.
"Why is he weeping?" asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him with his tail in the air.
"Why, indeed?" said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a sunbeam.
"Why, indeed?" whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low voice.
"He is weeping for a red rose," said the Nightingale.
"For a red rose?" they cried; "how very ridiculous!" and the little Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.
But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student's sorrow, and she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of Love.
Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed across the garden.
In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.
"Give me a red rose," she cried, "and I will sing you my sweetest song."
But the Tree shook its head.
"My roses are white," it answered; "as white as the foam of the sea, and whiter than the snow upon the mountain.
But go to my brother who grows round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you want."
So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing round the old sun-dial.
"Give me a red rose," she cried, "and I will sing you my sweetest song."
But the Tree shook its head.
"My roses are yellow," it answered; "as yellow as the hair of the mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the daffodil that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his scythe.
But go to my brother who grows beneath the Student's window, and perhaps he will give you what you want."
So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing beneath the Student's window.
"Give me a red rose," she cried, "and I will sing you my sweetest song."
But the Tree shook its head.
"My roses are red," it answered, "as red as the feet of the dove, and redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the ocean-cavern.
But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has nipped my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no roses at all this year."
"One red rose is all I want," cried the Nightingale, "only one red rose! Is there no way by which I can get it?"
"There is away," answered the Tree; "but it is so terrible that I dare not tell it to you."
"Tell it to me," said the Nightingale, "I am not afraid."
"If you want a red rose," said the Tree, "you must build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart's-blood.
You must sing to me with your breast against a thorn.
All night long you must sing to me, and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow into my veins, and become mine."
"Death is a great price to pay for a red rose," cried the Nightingale, "and Life is very dear to all.
It is pleasant to sit in the green wood, and to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot of pearl.
Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the bluebells that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the hill.
Yet Love is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird compared to the heart of a man?"
So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed through the grove.
The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left him, and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.
"Be happy," cried the Nightingale, "be happy; you shall have your red rose.
I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with my own heart's-blood.
All that I ask of you in return is that you will be a true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise, and mightier than Power, though he is mighty.
Flamecoloured are his wings, and coloured like flame is his body.
His lips are sweet as honey, and his breath is like frankincense."
The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew the things that are written down in books.
But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of the little Nightingale who had built her nest in his branches.
"Sing me one last song," he whispered; "I shall feel very lonely when you are gone."
So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water bubbling from a silver jar.
When she had finished her song the Student got up, and pulled a note-book and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.
"She has form," he said to himself, as he walked away through the grove--"that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling?
I am afraid not.
In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style, without any sincerity.
She would not sacrifice herself for others.
She thinks merely of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish.
Still, it must be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice.
What a pity it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good."
And he went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and began to think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.
And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to the Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn.
All night long she sang with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned down and listened.
All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper and deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.
She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl.
And on the top-most spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous rose, petal following petal, as song followed song.
Pale was it, at first, as the mist that hangs over the river—pale as the feet of the morning, and silver as the wings of the dawn.
As the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the rose that blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.
But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
"Press closer, little Nightingale," cried the Tree, "or the Day will come before the rose is finished."
So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder and louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul of a man and a maid.
And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like the flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the bride.
But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose's heart remained white, for only a Nightingale's heart's-blood can crimson the heart of a rose.
And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
"Press closer, little Nightingale," cried the Tree, "or the Day will come before the rose is finished."
So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her.
Bitter, bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang of the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the tomb.
And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern sky.
Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the heart.
But the Nightingale's voice grew fainter, and her little wings began to beat, and a film came over her eyes.
Fainter and fainter grew her song, and she felt something choking her in her throat.
Then she gave one last burst of music.
The white Moon heard it, and she forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky.
The red rose heard it, and it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold morning air.
Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke the sleeping shepherds from their dreams.
It floated through the reeds of the river, and they carried its message to the sea.
"Look, look!" cried the Tree, "the rose is finished now"; but the Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass, with the thorn in her heart.
And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.
"Why, what a wonderful piece of luck!" he cried; "here is a red rose! I have never seen any rose like it in all my life.
It is so beautiful that I am sure it has a long Latin name"; and he leaned down and plucked it.
Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor's house with the rose in his hand.
The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding blue silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.
"You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose," cried the Student.
"Here is the reddest rose in all the world.
You will wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell you how I love you."
But the girl frowned.
"I am afraid it will not go with my dress," she answered; "and, besides, the Chamberlain's nephew has sent me some real jewels, and everybody knows that jewels cost far more than flowers."
"Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful," said the Student angrily; and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter, and a cart-wheel went over it.
"Ungrateful!" said the girl.
"I tell you what, you are very rude; and, after all, who are you?
Only a Student.
Why, I don't believe you have even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain's nephew has"; and she got up from her chair and went into the house.
"What I a silly thing Love is," said the Student as he walked away.
"It is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making one believe things that are not true.
In fact, it is quite unpractical, and, as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to Philosophy and study Metaphysics."
So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and began to read.
Every afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go and play in the Giant's garden. 
It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass. 
Here and there over the grass stood beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve peach-trees that in the spring- time broke out into delicate blossoms of pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit. 
The birds sat on the trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games in order to listen to them.
"How happy we are here!" they cried to each other.
One day the Giant came back. 
He had been to visit his friend the Cornish ogre, and had stayed with him for seven years.
After the seven years were over he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was limited, and he determined to return to his own castle. 
When he arrived he saw the children playing in the garden.
"What are you doing here?" he cried in a very gruff voice, and the children ran away.
"My own garden is my own garden," said the Giant; "any one can understand that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but myself."
So he built a high wall all round it, and put up a notice-board.
TRESPASSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED
He was a very selfish Giant.
The poor children had now nowhere to play.
They tried to play on the road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did not like it. 
They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons were over, and talk about the beautiful garden inside.
"How happy we were there," they said to each other.
Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little blossoms and little birds. 
Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still winter. 
The birds did not care to sing in it as there were no children, and the trees forgot to blossom.
Once a beautiful flower put its head out from the grass, but when it saw the notice-board it was so sorry for the children that it slipped back into the ground again, and went off to sleep.
The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost. 
"Spring has forgotten this garden," they cried, "so we will live here all the year round."
The Snow covered up the grass with her great white cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver. 
Then they invited the North Wind to stay with them, and he came. 
He was wrapped in furs, and he roared all day about the garden, and blew the chimney- pots down.
"This is a delightful spot," he said, "we must ask the Hail on a visit." 
So the Hail came. 
Every day for three hours he rattled on the roof of the castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he ran round and round the garden as fast as he could go. 
He was dressed in grey, and his breath was like ice.
"I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming," said the Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold white garden; "I hope there will be a change in the weather."
But the Spring never came, nor the Summer. 
The Autumn gave golden fruit to every garden, but to the Giant's garden she gave none.
"He is too selfish," she said.
So it was always Winter there, and the North Wind, and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced about through the trees.
One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some lovely music.
It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the King's musicians passing by.
It was really only a little linnet singing outside his window, but it was so long since he had heard a bird sing in his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music in the world.
Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind ceased roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open casement.
"I believe the Spring has come at last," said the Giant; and he jumped out of bed and looked out.
What did he see?
He saw a most wonderful sight. 
Through a little hole in the wall the children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of the trees.
In every tree that he could see there was a little child.
And the trees were so glad to have the children back again that they had covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above the children's heads. 
The birds were flying about and twittering with delight, and the flowers were looking up through the green grass and laughing. 
It was a lovely scene, only in one corner it was still winter.
It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little boy.
He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.
The poor tree was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was blowing and roaring above it.
"Climb up! little boy," said the Tree, and it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy was too tiny.
And the Giant's heart melted as he looked out.
"How selfish I have been!" he said; "now I know why the Spring would not come here.
I will put that poor little boy on the top of the tree, and then I will knock down the wall, and my garden shall be the children's playground for ever and ever."
He was really very sorry for what he had done.
So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went out into the garden.
But when the children saw him they were so frightened that they all ran away, and the garden became winter again.
Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were so full of tears that he did not see the Giant coming.
And the Giant stole up behind him and took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree.
And the tree broke at once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the little boy stretched out his two arms and flung them round the Giant's neck, and kissed him.
And the other children, when they saw that the Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, and with them came the Spring.
"It is your garden now, little children," said the Giant, and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall. 
And when the people were going to market at twelve o'clock they found the Giant playing with the children in the most beautiful garden they had ever seen.
All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to bid him good-bye.
"But where is your little companion?" he said: "the boy I put into the tree."
The Giant loved him the best because he had kissed him.
"We don't know," answered the children; "he has gone away."
"You must tell him to be sure and come here tomorrow," said the Giant.
But the children said that they did not know where he lived, and had never seen him before; and the Giant felt very sad.
Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with the Giant.
But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again.
The Giant was very kind to all the children, yet he longed for his first little friend, and often spoke of him.
"How I would like to see him!" he used to say.
Years went over, and the Giant grew very old and feeble. 
He could not play about any more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the children at their games, and admired his garden.
"I have many beautiful flowers," he said; "but the children are the most beautiful flowers of all."
One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressing. 
He did not hate the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring asleep, and that the flowers were resting.
Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked. 
It certainly was a marvellous sight. 
In the farthest corner of the garden was a tree quite covered with lovely white blossoms.
Its branches were all golden, and silver fruit hung down from them, and underneath it stood the little boy he had loved.
Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden. 
He hastened across the grass, and came near to the child.
And when he came quite close his face grew red with anger, and he said, "Who hath dared to wound thee?"
For on the palms of the child's hands were the prints of two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.
"Who hath dared to wound thee?" cried the Giant; "tell me, that I may take my big sword and slay him."
"Nay!" answered the child; "but these are the wounds of Love."
"Who art thou?" said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he knelt before the little child.
And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, "You let me play once in your garden, to-day you shall come with me to my garden, which is Paradise."
And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying dead under the tree, all covered with white blossoms.
THE DEVOTED FRIEND

One morning the old Water-rat put his head out of his hole.
He had bright beady eyes and stiff grey whiskers and his tail was like a long bit of black india-rubber.
The little ducks were swimming about in the pond, looking just like a lot of yellow canaries, and their mother, who was pure white with real red legs, was trying to teach them how to stand on their heads in the water.
"You will never be in the best society unless you can stand on your heads," she kept saying to them; and every now and then she showed them how it was done.
But the little ducks paid no attention to her.
They were so young that they did not know what an advantage it is to be in society at all.
"What disobedient children!" cried the old Water-rat; "they really deserve to be drowned." "Nothing of the kind," answered the Duck, "every one must make a beginning, and parents cannot be too patient."
"Ah! I know nothing about the feelings of parents," said the Waterrat; "I am not a family man. In fact, I have never been married, and I never intend to be.
Love is all very well in its way, but friendship is much higher.
Indeed, I know of nothing in the world that is either nobler or rarer than a devoted friendship."
"And what, pray, is your idea of the duties of a devoted friend?" asked a Green Linnet, who was sitting in a willow-tree hard by, and had overheard the conversation.
"Yes, that is just what I want to know," said the Duck; and she swam away to the end of the pond, and stood upon her head, in order to give her children a good example.
"What a silly question!" cried the Water-rat.
"I should expect my devoted friend to be devoted to me, of course."
"And what would you do in return?" said the little bird, swinging upon a silver spray, and flapping his tiny wings.
"I don't understand you," answered the Water-rat.
"Let me tell you a story on the subject," said the Linnet.
"Is the story about me?" asked the Water-rat.
"If so, I will listen to it, for I am extremely fond of fiction."
"It is applicable to you," answered the Linnet; and he flew down, and alighting upon the bank, he told the story of The Devoted Friend.
"Once upon a time," said the Linnet, "there was an honest little fellow named Hans."
"Was he very distinguished?" asked the Water-rat.
"No," answered the Linnet, "I don't think he was distinguished at all, except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured face.
He lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he worked in his garden.
In all the country-side there was no garden so lovely as his.
Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and Shepherds'-purses, and Fair-maids of France.
There were damask Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets and white. Columbine and Ladysmock, Marjoram and Wild Basil, the Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil and the Clove-Pink bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the months went by, one flower taking another flower's place, so that there were always beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.
"Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend of all was big Hugh the Miller.
Indeed, so devoted was the rich Miller to little Hans, that be would never go by his garden without leaning over the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of sweet herbs, or filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it was the fruit season.
"'Real friends should have everything in common,' the Miller used to say, and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of having a friend with such noble ideas.
"Sometimes, indeed, the neighbours thought it strange that the rich Miller never gave little Hans anything in return, though he had a hundred sacks of flour stored away in his mill, and six milch cows, and a large flock of woolly sheep; but Hans never troubled his head about these things, and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to listen to all the wonderful things the Miller used to say about the unselfishness of true friendship.
"So little Hans worked away in his garden.
During the spring, the summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came, and he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered a good deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed without any supper but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.
In the winter, also, he was extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to see him then.
"'There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the snow lasts,' the Miller used to say to his wife, 'for when people are in trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by visitors.
That at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure I am right.
So I shall wait till the spring comes, and then I shall pay him a visit, and he will be able to give me a large basket of primroses and that will make him so happy.'
"'You are certainly very thoughtful about others,' answered the Wife, as she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood fire; 'very thoughtful indeed.
It is quite a treat to hear you talk about friendship.
I am sure the clergyman himself could not say such beautiful things as you do, though he does live in a three-storied house, and wear a gold ring on his little finger.'
"'But could we not ask little Hans up here?' said the Miller's youngest son.
'If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my porridge, and show him my white rabbits.'
"'What a silly boy you are'! cried the Miller; 'I really don't know what is the use of sending you to school.
You seem not to learn anything.
Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire, and our good supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get envious, and envy is a most terrible thing, and would spoil anybody's nature.
I certainly will not allow Hans' nature to be spoiled.
I am his best friend, and I will always watch over him, and see that he is not led into any temptations.
Besides, if Hans came here, he might ask me to let him have some flour on credit, and that I could not do.
Flour is one thing, and friendship is another, and they should not be confused.
Why, the words are spelt differently, and mean quite different things.
Everybody can see that.'
"'How well you talk'! said the Miller's Wife, pouring herself out a large glass of warm ale; 'really I feel quite drowsy. It is just like being in church.'
"'Lots of people act well,' answered the Miller; 'but very few people talk well, which shows that talking is much the more difficult thing of the two, and much the finer thing also'; and he
looked sternly across the table at his little son, who felt so ashamed of himself that he hung his head down, and grew quite scarlet, and began to cry into his tea.
However, he was so young that you must excuse him."
"Is that the end of the story?" asked the Water-rat.
"Certainly not," answered the Linnet, "that is the beginning."
"Then you are quite behind the age," said the Water-rat.
"Every good story-teller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes on to the beginning, and concludes with the middle.
That is the new method.
I heard all about it the other day from a critic who was walking round the pond with a young man.
He spoke of the matter at great length, and I am sure he must have been right, for he had blue spectacles and a bald head, and whenever the young man made any remark, he always answered 'Pooh!'
But pray go on with your story.
I like the Miller immensely.
I have all kinds of beautiful sentiments myself, so there is a great sympathy between us."
"Well," said the Linnet, hopping now on one leg and now on the other, "as soon as the winter was over, and the primroses began to open their pale yellow stars, the Miller said to his wife that he would go down and see little Hans.
"'Why, what a good heart you have'! cried his Wife; 'you are always thinking of others.
And mind you take the big basket with you for the flowers.'
"So the Miller tied the sails of the windmill together with a strong iron chain, and went down the hill with the basket on his arm.
"'Good morning, little Hans,' said the Miller.
"'Good morning,' said Hans, leaning on his spade, and smiling from ear to ear.
"'And how have you been all the winter?' said the Miller.
"'Well, really,' cried Hans, 'it is very good of you to ask, very good indeed.
I am afraid I had rather a hard time of it, but now the spring has come, and I am quite happy, and all my flowers are doing well.'
"'We often talked of you during the winter, Hans,' said the Miller,
'and wondered how you were getting on.'
"'That was kind of you,' said Hans; 'I was half afraid you had forgotten me.'
"'Hans, I am surprised at you,' said the Miller; 'friendship never forgets.
That is the wonderful thing about it, but I am afraid you don't understand the poetry of life. How lovely your primroses are looking, by-the-bye"!
"'They are certainly very lovely,' said Hans, 'and it is a most lucky thing for me that I have so many.
I am going to bring them into the market and sell them to the Burgomaster's daughter, and buy back my wheelbarrow with the money.'
"'Buy back your wheelbarrow?
You don't mean to say you have sold it?
What a very stupid thing to do'!
"'Well, the fact is,' said Hans, 'that I was obliged to.
You see the winter was a very bad time for me, and I really had no money at all to buy bread with.
So I first sold the silver buttons off my Sunday coat, and then I sold my silver chain, and then I sold my big pipe, and at last I sold my wheelbarrow.
But I am going to buy them all back again now.'
"'Hans,' said the Miller, 'I will give you my wheelbarrow.
It is not in very good repair; indeed, one side is gone, and there is something wrong with the wheel-spokes; but in spite of that I will give it to you.
I know it is very generous of me, and a great many people would think me extremely foolish for parting with it, but I am not like the rest of the world.
I think that generosity is the essence of friendship, and, besides, I have got a new wheelbarrow for myself.
Yes, you may set your mind at ease, I will give you my wheelbarrow.'
"'Well, really, that is generous of you,' said little Hans, and his funny round face glowed all over with pleasure.
'I can easily put it in repair, as I have a plank of wood in the house.'
"'A plank of wood'! said the Miller; 'why, that is just what I want for the roof of my barn.
There is a very large hole in it, and the corn will all get damp if I don't stop it up.
How lucky you mentioned it!
It is quite remarkable how one good action always breeds another.
I have given you my wheelbarrow, and now you are going to give me your plank.
Of course, the wheelbarrow is worth far more than the plank, but true, friendship never notices things like that.
Pray get it at once, and I will set to work at my barn this very day.'
"'Certainly,' cried little Hans, and he ran into the shed and dragged the plank out.
"'It is not a very big plank,' said the Miller, looking at it, 'and I am afraid that after I have mended my barn-roof there won't be any left for you to mend the wheelbarrow with; but, of course, that is not my fault.
And now, as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I am sure you would like to give me some flowers in return.
Here is the basket, and mind you fill it quite full.'
"'Quite full?' said little Hans, rather sorrowfully, for it was really a very big basket, and he knew that if he filled it he would have no flowers left for the market and he was very anxious to get his silver buttons back.
"'Well, really,' answered the Miller, 'as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I don't think that it is much to ask you for a few flowers.
I may be wrong, but I should have thought that friendship, true friendship, was quite free from selfishness of any kind.'
"'My dear friend, my best friend,' cried little Hans, 'you are welcome to all the flowers in my garden.
I would much sooner have your good opinion than my silver buttons, any day'; and he ran and plucked all his pretty primroses, and filled the Miller's basket.
"'Good-bye, little Hans,' said the Miller, as he went up the hill with the plank on his shoulder, and the big basket in his hand.
"'Good-bye,' said little Hans, and he began to dig away quite merrily, he was so pleased about the wheelbarrow.
"The next day he was nailing up some honeysuckle against the porch, when he heard the Miller's voice calling to him from the road.
So he jumped off the ladder, and ran down the garden, and looked over the wall.
"There was the Miller with a large sack of flour on his back.
"'Dear little Hans,' said the Miller, 'would you mind carrying this sack of flour for me to market?'
"'Oh, I am so sorry,' said Hans, 'but I am really very busy to-day.
I have got all my creepers to nail up, and all my flowers to water, and all my grass to roll.'
"'Well, really,' said the Miller, 'I think that, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, it is rather unfriendly of you to refuse.'
"'Oh, don't say that,' cried little Hans, 'I wouldn't be unfriendly for the whole world'; and he ran in for his cap, and trudged off with the big sack on his shoulders.
"It was a very hot day, and the road was terribly dusty, and before Hans had reached the sixth milestone he was so tired that he had to sit down and rest.
However, he went on bravely, and as last he reached the market.
After he had waited there some time, he sold the sack of flour for a very good price, and then he returned home at once, for he was afraid that if he stopped too late he might meet some robbers on the way.
"'It has certainly been a hard day,' said little Hans to himself as he was going to bed, 'but I am glad I did not refuse the Miller, for he is my best friend, and, besides, he is going to give me his wheelbarrow.'
"Early the next morning the Miller came down to get the money for his sack of flour, but little Hans was so tired that he was still in bed.
"'Upon my word,' said the Miller, 'you are very lazy.
Really, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, I think you might work harder. Idleness is a great sin, and I certainly don't like any of my friends to be idle or sluggish.
You must not mind my speaking quite plainly to you.
Of course I should not dream of doing so if I were not your friend.
But what is the good of friendship if one cannot say exactly what one means?
Anybody can say charming things and try to please and to flatter, but a true friend always says unpleasant things, and does not mind giving pain.
Indeed, if he is a really true friend he prefers it, for he knows that then he is doing good.'
"'I am very sorry,' said little Hans, rubbing his eyes and pulling off his night-cap, 'but I was so tired that I thought I would lie in bed for a little time, and listen to the birds singing.
Do you know that I always work better after hearing the birds sing?'
"'Well, I am glad of that,' said the Miller, clapping little Hans on the back, 'for I want you to come up to the mill as soon as you are dressed, and mend my barn-roof for me.'
"Poor little Hans was very anxious to go and work in his garden, for his flowers had not been watered for two days, but he did not like to refuse the Miller, as he was such a good friend to him.
"'Do you think it would be unfriendly of me if I said I was busy?' he inquired in a shy and timid voice.
"'Well, really,' answered the Miller, 'I do not think it is much to ask of you, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow; but of course if you refuse I will go and do it myself.'
"'Oh! on no account,' cried little Hans and he jumped out of bed, and dressed himself, and went up to the barn.
"He worked there all day long, till sunset, and at sunset the Miller came to see how he was getting on.
"'Have you mended the hole in the roof yet, little Hans?' cried the Miller in a cheery voice.
"'It is quite mended,' answered little Hans, coming down the ladder.
"'Ah'! said the Miller, 'there is no work so delightful as the work one does for others.'
"'It is certainly a great privilege to hear you talk,' answered little Hans, sitting down, and wiping his forehead, 'a very great privilege.
But I am afraid I shall never have such beautiful ideas as you have.'
"'Oh! they will come to you,' said the Miller, 'but you must take more pains.
At present you have only the practice of friendship; some day you will have the theory also.'
"'Do you really think I shall?' asked little Hans.
"'I have no doubt of it,' answered the Miller, 'but now that you have mended the roof, you had better go home and rest, for I want you to drive my sheep to the mountain to-morrow.'
"Poor little Hans was afraid to say anything to this, and early the next morning the Miller brought his sheep round to the cottage, and Hans started off with them to the mountain.
It took him the whole day to get there and back; and when he returned he was so tired that he went off to sleep in his chair, and did not wake up till it was broad daylight.
"'What a delightful time I shall have in my garden,' he said, and he went to work at once.
"But somehow he was never able to look after his flowers at all, for his friend the Miller was always coming round and sending him off on long errands, or getting him to help at the mill.
Little Hans was very much distressed at times, as he was afraid his flowers would think he had forgotten them, but he consoled himself by the reflection that the Miller was his best friend. 'Besides,' he used to say, 'he is going to give me his wheelbarrow, and that
is an act of pure generosity.'
"So little Hans worked away for the Miller, and the Miller said all kinds of beautiful things about friendship, which Hans took down in a note-book, and used to read over at night, for he was a very good scholar.
"Now it happened that one evening little Hans was sitting by his fireside when a loud rap came at the door.
It was a very wild night, and the wind was blowing and roaring round the house so terribly that at first he thought it was merely the storm.
But a second rap came, and then a third, louder than any of the others.
"'It is some poor traveller,' said little Hans to himself, and he ran to the door.
"There stood the Miller with a lantern in one hand and a big stick in the other.
"'Dear little Hans,' cried the Miller, 'I am in great trouble.
My little boy has fallen off a ladder and hurt himself, and I am going for the Doctor.
But he lives so far away, and it is such a bad night, that it has just occurred to me that it would be much better if you went instead of me.
You know I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, and so, it is only fair that you should do something for me in return.'
"'Certainly,' cried little Hans, 'I take it quite as a compliment your coming to me, and I will start off at once.
But you must lend me your lantern, as the night is so dark that I am afraid I might fall into the ditch.'
"'I am very sorry,' answered the Miller, 'but it is my new lantern, and it would be a great loss to me if anything happened to it.'
"'Well, never mind, I will do without it,' cried little Hans, and he took down his great fur coat, and his warm scarlet cap, and tied a muffler round his throat, and started off.
"What a dreadful storm it was!
The night was so black that little Hans could hardly see, and the wind was so strong that he could scarcely stand.
However, he was very courageous, and after he had been walking about three hours, he arrived at the Doctor's house, and knocked at the door.
"'Who is there?' cried the Doctor, putting his head out of his bedroom window.
"'Little Hans, Doctor.'
"'What do you want, little Hans?'
"'The Miller's son has fallen from a ladder, and has hurt himself, and the Miller wants you to come at once.'
"'All right!' said the Doctor; and he ordered his horse, and his big boots, and his lantern, and came downstairs, and rode off in the direction of the Miller's house, little Hans trudging behind him.
"But the storm grew worse and worse, and the rain fell in torrents, and little Hans could not see where he was going, or keep up with the horse.
At last he lost his way, and wandered off on the moor, which was a very dangerous place, as it was full of deep holes, and there poor little Hans was drowned.
His body was found the next day by some goatherds, floating in a great pool of water, and was brought back by them to the cottage.
"Everybody went to little Hans' funeral, as he was so popular, and the Miller was the chief mourner.
"'As I was his best friend,' said the Miller, 'it is only fair that I should have the best place'; so he walked at the head of the procession in a long black cloak, and every now and then he wiped his eyes with a big pocket-handkerchief.
"'Little Hans is certainly a great loss to every one,' said the Blacksmith, when the funeral was over, and they were all seated comfortably in the inn, drinking spiced wine and eating sweet
cakes.
"'A great loss to me at any rate,' answered the Miller; 'why, I had as good as given him my wheelbarrow, and now I really don't know what to do with it.
It is very much in my way at home, and it is in such bad repair that I could not get anything for it if I sold it.
I will certainly take care not to give away anything again.
One always suffers for being generous.'"
"Well?" said the Water-rat, after a long pause.
"Well, that is the end," said the Linnet.
"But what became of the Miller?" asked the Water-rat.
"Oh! I really don't know," replied the Linnet; "and I am sure that I don't care."
"It is quite evident then that you have no sympathy in your nature," said the Water-rat.
"I am afraid you don't quite see the moral of the story," remarked the Linnet.
"The what?" screamed the Water-rat.
"The moral."
"Do you mean to say that the story has a moral?"
"Certainly," said the Linnet.
"Well, really," said the Water-rat, in a very angry manner, "I think you should have told me that before you began.
If you had done so, I certainly would not have listened to you; in fact, I should have said 'Pooh,' like the critic.
However, I can say it now"; so he shouted out "Pooh" at the top of his voice, gave a whisk with his tail, and went back into his hole.
"And how do you like the Water-rat?" asked the Duck, who came paddling up some minutes afterwards.
"He has a great many good points, but for my own part I have a mother's feelings, and I can never look at a confirmed bachelor without the tears coming into my eyes."
"I am rather afraid that I have annoyed him," answered the Linnet.
"The fact is, that I told him a story with a moral."
"Ah! that is always a very dangerous thing to do," said the Duck.
And I quite agree with her.

THE REMARKABLE ROCKET

The King's son was going to be married, so there were general rejoicings.
He had waited a whole year for his bride, and at last she had arrived.
She was a Russian Princess, and had driven all the way from Finland in a sledge drawn by six reindeer.
The sledge was shaped like a great golden swan, and between the swan's wings lay the little Princess herself.
Her long ermine-cloak reached right down to her feet, on her head was a tiny cap of silver tissue, and she was as pale as the Snow Palace in which she had always lived.
So pale was she that as she drove through the streets all the people wondered.
"She is like a white rose!" they cried, and they threw down flowers on her from the balconies.
At the gate of the Castle the Prince was waiting to receive her.
He had dreamy violet eyes, and his hair was like fine gold.
When he saw her he sank upon one knee, and kissed her hand.
"Your picture was beautiful," he murmured, "but you are more beautiful than your picture"; and the little Princess blushed.
"She was like a white rose before," said a young Page to his neighbour, "but she is like a red rose now"; and the whole Court was delighted.
For the next three days everybody went about saying, "White rose, Red rose, Red rose, White rose"; and the King gave orders that the Page's salary was to be doubled.
As he received no salary at all this was not of much use to him, but it was considered a great honour, and was duly published in the Court Gazette.
When the three days were over the marriage was celebrated.
It was a magnificent ceremony, and the bride and bridegroom walked hand in hand under a canopy of purple velvet embroidered with little pearls.
Then there was a State Banquet, which lasted for five hours.
The Prince and Princess sat at the top of the Great Hall and drank out of a cup of clear crystal.
Only true lovers could drink out of this cup, for if false lips touched it, it grew grey and dull and cloudy.
"It's quite clear that they love each other," said the little Page, "as clear as crystal!" and the King doubled his salary a second time.
"What an honour!" cried all the courtiers.
After the banquet there was to be a Ball.
The bride and bridegroom were to dance the Rose-dance together, and the King had promised to play the flute.
He played very badly, but no one had ever dared to tell him so, because he was the King.
Indeed, he knew only two airs, and was never quite certain which one he was playing; but it made no matter, for, whatever he did, everybody cried out,
"Charming! charming!"
The last item on the programme was a grand display of fireworks, to be let off exactly at midnight.
The little Princess had never seen a firework in her life, so the King had given orders that the Royal Pyrotechnist should be in attendance on the day of her marriage.
"What are fireworks like?" she had asked the Prince, one morning, as she was walking on the terrace.
"They are like the Aurora Borealis," said the King, who always answered questions that were addressed to other people, "only much more natural.
I prefer them to stars myself, as you always know when they are going to appear, and they are as delightful as my own flute-playing.
You must certainly see them."
So at the end of the King's garden a great stand had been set up, and as soon as the Royal Pyrotechnist had put everything in its proper place, the fireworks began to talk to each other.
"The world is certainly very beautiful," cried a little Squib.
"Just look at those yellow tulips.
Why! if they were real crackers they could not be lovelier.
I am very glad I have travelled.
Travel improves the mind wonderfully, and does away with all one's prejudices."
"The King's garden is not the world, you foolish squib," said a big Roman Candle; "the world is an enormous place, and it would take you three days to see it thoroughly."
"Any place you love is the world to you," exclaimed a pensive Catherine Wheel, who had been attached to an old deal box in early life, and prided herself on her broken heart; "but love is not fashionable any more, the poets have killed it.
They wrote so much about it that nobody believed them, and I am not surprised.
True love suffers, and is silent.
I remember myself once--But it is no matter now. Romance is a thing of the past."
"Nonsense!" said the Roman Candle, "Romance never dies.
It is like the moon, and lives for ever.
The bride and bridegroom, for instance, love each other very dearly.
I heard all about them this morning from a brown-paper cartridge, who happened to be staying in the same drawer as myself, and knew the latest Court news."
But the Catherine Wheel shook her head.
"Romance is dead, Romance is dead, Romance is dead," she murmured.
She was one of those people who think that, if you say the same thing over and over a great many times, it becomes true in the end.
Suddenly, a sharp, dry cough was heard, and they all looked round.
It came from a tall, supercilious-looking Rocket, who was tied to the end of a long stick.
He always coughed before he made any observation, so as to attract attention.
"Ahem! ahem!" he said, and everybody listened except the poor Catherine Wheel, who was still shaking her head, and murmuring, "Romance is dead."
"Order! order!" cried out a Cracker.
He was something of a politician, and had always taken a prominent part in the local elections, so he knew the proper Parliamentary expressions to use.
"Quite dead," whispered the Catherine Wheel, and she went off to sleep.
As soon as there was perfect silence, the Rocket coughed a third time and began.
He spoke with a very slow, distinct voice, as if he was dictating his memoirs, and always looked over the shoulder of the person to whom he was talking.
In fact, he had a most distinguished manner.
"How fortunate it is for the King's son," he remarked, "that he is to be married on the very day on which I am to be let off.
Really, if it had been arranged beforehand, it could not have turned out better for him; but, Princes are always lucky."
"Dear me!" said the little Squib, "I thought it was quite the other way, and that we were to be let off in the Prince's honour."
"It may be so with you," he answered; "indeed, I have no doubt that it is, but with me it is different.
I am a very remarkable Rocket, and come of remarkable parents.
My mother was the most celebrated Catherine Wheel of her day, and was renowned for her graceful dancing.
When she made her great public appearance she spun round nineteen times before she went out, and each time that she did so she threw into the air seven pink stars.
She was three feet and a half in diameter, and made of the very best gunpowder.
My father was a Rocket like myself, and of French extraction.
He flew so high that the people were afraid that he would never come down again.
He did, though, for he was of a kindly disposition, and he made a most brilliant descent in a shower of golden rain.
The newspapers wrote about his performance in very flattering terms.
Indeed, the Court Gazette called him a triumph of Pylotechnic art."
"Pyrotechnic, Pyrotechnic, you mean," said a Bengal Light; "I know it is Pyrotechnic, for I saw it written on my own canister."
"Well, I said Pylotechnic," answered the Rocket, in a severe tone of voice, and the Bengal Light felt so crushed that he began at once to bully the little squibs, in order to show that he was still a person of some importance.
"I was saying," continued the Rocket, "I was saying--What was I saying?"
"You were talking about yourself," replied the Roman Candle.
"Of course; I knew I was discussing some interesting subject when I was so rudely interrupted.
I hate rudeness and bad manners of every kind, for I am extremely sensitive.
No one in the whole world is so sensitive as I am, I am quite sure of that."
"What is a sensitive person?" said the Cracker to the Roman Candle.
"A person who, because he has corns himself, always treads on other people's toes," answered the Roman Candle in a low whisper; and the Cracker nearly exploded with laughter.
"Pray, what are you laughing at?" inquired the Rocket; "I am not laughing."
"I am laughing because I am happy," replied the Cracker.
"That is a very selfish reason," said the Rocket angrily.
"What right have you to be happy?
You should be thinking about others.
In fact, you should be thinking about me.
I am always thinking about myself, and I expect everybody else to do the same.
That is what is called sympathy.
It is a beautiful virtue, and I possess it in a high degree.
Suppose, for instance, anything happened to me to-night, what a misfortune that would be for every one!
The Prince and Princess would never be happy again, their whole married life would be spoiled; and as for the King, I know he would not get over it.
Really, when I begin to reflect on the importance of my position, I am almost moved to tears."
"If you want to give pleasure to others," cried the Roman Candle,
"you had better keep yourself dry."
"Certainly," exclaimed the Bengal Light, who was now in better spirits; "that is only common sense."
"Common sense, indeed!" said the Rocket indignantly; "you forget that I am very uncommon, and very remarkable.
Why, anybody can have common sense, provided that they have no imagination.
But I have imagination, for I never think of things as they really are; I always think of them as being quite different.
As for keeping myself dry, there is evidently no one here who can at all appreciate an emotional nature.
Fortunately for myself, I don't care.
The only thing that sustains one through life is the consciousness of the immense inferiority of everybody else, and this is a feeling that I have always cultivated.
But none of you have any hearts.
Here you are laughing and making merry just as if the Prince and Princess had not just been married."
"Well, really," exclaimed a small Fire-balloon, "why not? It is a most joyful occasion, and when I soar up into the air I intend to tell the stars all about it.
You will see them twinkle when I talk to them about the pretty bride."
"Ah! what a trivial view of life!" said the Rocket; "but it is only what I expected.
There is nothing in you; you are hollow and empty.
Why, perhaps the Prince and Princess may go to live in a country where there is a deep river, and perhaps they may have one only son, a little fair-haired boy with violet eyes like the Prince himself; and perhaps some day he may go out to walk with his nurse; and perhaps the nurse may go to sleep under a great elder-tree; and perhaps the little boy may fall into the deep river and be drowned.
What a terrible misfortune! Poor people, to lose their only son! It is really too dreadful! I shall never get over it."
"But they have not lost their only son," said the Roman Candle; "no misfortune has happened to them at all."
"I never said that they had," replied the Rocket; "I said that they might.
If they had lost their only son there would be no use in saying anything more about the matter.
I hate people who cry over spilt milk.
But when I think that they might lose their only son, I certainly am very much affected."
"You certainly are!" cried the Bengal Light.
"In fact, you are the most affected person I ever met."
"You are the rudest person I ever met," said the Rocket, "and you cannot understand my friendship for the Prince."
"Why, you don't even know him," growled the Roman Candle.
"I never said I knew him," answered the Rocket.
"I dare say that if I knew him I should not be his friend at all.
It is a very dangerous thing to know one's friends."
"You had really better keep yourself dry," said the Fire-balloon.
"That is the important thing."
"Very important for you, I have no doubt," answered the Rocket, "but I shall weep if I choose"; and he actually burst into real tears, which flowed down his stick like rain-drops, and nearly drowned two little beetles, who were just thinking of setting up house together, and were looking for a nice dry spot to live in.
"He must have a truly romantic nature," said the Catherine Wheel, "for he weeps when there is nothing at all to weep about"; and she heaved a deep sigh, and thought about the deal box.
But the Roman Candle and the Bengal Light were quite indignant, and kept saying, "Humbug! humbug!" at the top of their voices.
They were extremely practical, and whenever they objected to anything they called it humbug.
Then the moon rose like a wonderful silver shield; and the stars began to shine, and a sound of music came from the palace.
The Prince and Princess were leading the dance.
They danced so beautifully that the tall white lilies peeped in at the window and watched them, and the great red poppies nodded their heads and beat time.
Then ten o'clock struck, and then eleven, and then twelve, and at the last stroke of midnight every one came out on the terrace, and the King sent for the Royal Pyrotechnist.
"Let the fireworks begin," said the King; and the Royal Pyrotechnist made a low bow, and marched down to the end of the garden.
He had six attendants with him, each of whom carried a lighted torch at the end of a long pole.
It was certainly a magnificent display.
Whizz! Whizz! went the Catherine Wheel, as she spun round and round.
Boom! Boom! went the Roman Candle.
Then the Squibs danced all over the place, and the Bengal Lights made everything look scarlet.
"Good-bye," cried the Fire-balloon, as he soared away, dropping tiny blue sparks.
Bang! Bang! answered the Crackers, who were enjoying themselves immensely.
Every one was a great success except the Remarkable Rocket.
He was so damp with crying that he could not go off at all.
The best thing in him was the gunpowder, and that was so wet with tears that it was of no use.
All his poor relations, to whom he would never speak, except with a sneer, shot up into the sky like wonderful golden flowers with blossoms of fire.
Huzza! Huzza! cried the Court; and the little Princess laughed with pleasure.
"I suppose they are reserving me for some grand occasion," said the Rocket; "no doubt that is what it means," and he looked more supercilious than ever.
The next day the workmen came to put everything tidy.
"This is evidently a deputation," said the Rocket; "I will receive them with becoming dignity" so he put his nose in the air, and began to frown severely as if he were thinking about some very important subject.
But they took no notice of him at all till they were just going away.
Then one of them caught sight of him.
"Hallo!" he cried, "what a bad rocket!" and he threw him over the wall into the ditch.
"BAD Rocket? BAD Rocket?" he said, as he whirled through the air; "impossible! GRAND Rocket, that is what the man said.
BAD and GRAND sound very much the same, indeed they often are the same"; and he fell into the mud.
"It is not comfortable here," he remarked, "but no doubt it is some fashionable watering-place, and they have sent me away to recruit my health.
My nerves are certainly very much shattered, and I require rest."
Then a little Frog, with bright jewelled eyes, and a green mottled coat, swam up to him.
"A new arrival, I see!" said the Frog.
"Well, after all there is nothing like mud.
Give me rainy weather and a ditch, and I am quite happy.
Do you think it will be a wet afternoon?
I am sure I hope so, but the sky is quite blue and cloudless.
What a pity!"
"Ahem! ahem!" said the Rocket, and he began to cough.
"What a delightful voice you have!" cried the Frog.
"Really it is quite like a croak, and croaking is of course the most musical sound in the world.
You will hear our glee-club this evening.
We sit in the old duck pond close by the farmer's house, and as soon as the moon rises we begin.
It is so entrancing that everybody lies awake to listen to us.
In fact, it was only yesterday that I heard the farmer's wife say to her mother that she could not get a wink of sleep at night on account of us.
It is most gratifying to find oneself so popular."
"Ahem! ahem!" said the Rocket angrily.
He was very much annoyed that he could not get a word in.
"A delightful voice, certainly," continued the Frog; "I hope you will come over to the duck-pond.
I am off to look for my daughters.
I have six beautiful daughters, and I am so afraid the Pike may meet them.
He is a perfect monster, and would have no hesitation in breakfasting off them.
Well, good-bye: I have enjoyed our conversation very much, I assure you."
"Conversation, indeed!" said the Rocket.
"You have talked the whole time yourself.
That is not conversation."
"Somebody must listen," answered the Frog, "and I like to do all the talking myself.
It saves time, and prevents arguments."
"But I like arguments," said the Rocket.
"I hope not," said the Frog complacently.
"Arguments are extremely vulgar, for everybody in good society holds exactly the same opinions.
Good-bye a second time; I see my daughters in the distance and the little Frog swam away.
"You are a very irritating person," said the Rocket, "and very illbred.
I hate people who talk about themselves, as you do, when one wants to talk about oneself, as I do.
It is what I call selfishness, and selfishness is a most detestable thing, especially to any one of my temperament, for I am well known for my sympathetic nature.
In fact, you should take example by me; you could not possibly have a better model.
Now that you have the chance you had better avail yourself of it, for I am going back to Court almost immediately.
I am a great favourite at Court; in fact, the Prince and Princess were married yesterday in my honour.
Of course you know nothing of these matters, for you are a provincial."
"There is no good talking to him," said a Dragon-fly, who was sitting on the top of a large brown bulrush; "no good at all, for he has gone away."
"Well, that is his loss, not mine," answered the Rocket.
"I am not going to stop talking to him merely because he pays no attention.
I like hearing myself talk.
It is one of my greatest pleasures.
I often have long conversations all by myself, and I am so clever that sometimes I don't understand a single word of what I am saying."
"Then you should certainly lecture on Philosophy," said the Dragonfly; and he spread a pair of lovely gauze wings and soared away into the sky.
"How very silly of him not to stay here!" said the Rocket.
"I am sure that he has not often got such a chance of improving his mind.
However, I don't care a bit.
Genius like mine is sure to be appreciated some day"; and he sank down a little deeper into the mud.
After some time a large White Duck swam up to him.
She had yellow legs, and webbed feet, and was considered a great beauty on account of her waddle.
"Quack, quack, quack," she said.
"What a curious shape you are!
May I ask were you born like that, or is it the result of an accident?"
"It is quite evident that you have always lived in the country," answered the Rocket, "otherwise you would know who I am.
However, I excuse your ignorance.
It would be unfair to expect other people to be as remarkable as oneself.
You will no doubt be surprised to hear that I can fly up into the sky, and come down in a shower of golden rain."
"I don't think much of that," said the Duck, "as I cannot see what use it is to any one.
Now, if you could plough the fields like the ox, or draw a cart like the horse, or look after the sheep like the collie-dog, that would be something."
"My good creature," cried the Rocket in a very haughty tone of voice, "I see that you belong to the lower orders.
A person of my position is never useful.
We have certain accomplishments, and that is more than sufficient.
I have no sympathy myself with industry of any kind, least of all with such industries as you seem to recommend.
Indeed, I have always been of opinion that hard work is simply the refuge of people who have nothing whatever to do."
"Well, well," said the Duck, who was of a very peaceable disposition, and never quarrelled with any one, "everybody has different tastes.
I hope, at any rate, that you are going to take up your residence here."
"Oh! dear no," cried the Rocket.
"I am merely a visitor, a distinguished visitor.
The fact is that I find this place rather tedious.
There is neither society here, nor solitude.
In fact, it is essentially suburban.
I shall probably go back to Court, for I know that I am destined to make a sensation in the world."
"I had thoughts of entering public life once myself," remarked the Duck; "there are so many things that need reforming.
Indeed, I took the chair at a meeting some time ago, and we passed resolutions condemning everything that we did not like.
However, they did not seem to have much effect.
Now I go in for domesticity, and look after my family."
"I am made for public life," said the Rocket, "and so are all my relations, even the humblest of them.
Whenever we appear we excite great attention.
I have not actually appeared myself, but when I do so it will be a magnificent sight.
As for domesticity, it ages one rapidly, and distracts one's mind from higher things."
"Ah! the higher things of life, how fine they are!" said the Duck; "and that reminds me how hungry I feel": and she swam away down the stream, saying, "Quack, quack, quack."
"Come back! come back!" screamed the Rocket, "I have a great deal to say to you"; but the Duck paid no attention to him.
"I am glad that she has gone," he said to himself, "she has a decidedly middle-class mind"; and he sank a little deeper still into the mud, and began to think about the loneliness of genius, when suddenly two little boys in white smocks came running down the bank, with a kettle and some faggots.
"This must be the deputation," said the Rocket, and he tried to look very dignified.
"Hallo!" cried one of the boys, "look at this old stick! I wonder how it came here"; and he picked the rocket out of the ditch.
"OLD Stick!" said the Rocket, "impossible! GOLD Stick, that is what he said.
Gold Stick is very complimentary.
In fact, he mistakes me for one of the Court dignitaries!"
"Let us put it into the fire!" said the other boy, "it will help to boil the kettle."
So they piled the faggots together, and put the Rocket on top, and lit the fire.
"This is magnificent," cried the Rocket, "they are going to let me off in broad day-light, so that every one can see me."
"We will go to sleep now," they said, "and when we wake up the kettle will be boiled"; and they lay down on the grass, and shut their eyes.
The Rocket was very damp, so he took a long time to burn.
At last, however, the fire caught him.
"Now I am going off!" he cried, and he made himself very stiff and straight.
"I know I shall go much higher than the stars, much higher than the moon, much higher than the sun. In fact, I shall go so high that--"
Fizz! Fizz! Fizz! and he went straight up into the air.
"Delightful!" he cried, "I shall go on like this for ever. What a success I am!"
But nobody saw him.
Then he began to feel a curious tingling sensation all over him.
"Now I am going to explode," he cried.
"I shall set the whole world on fire, and make such a noise that nobody will talk about anything else for a whole year."
And he certainly did explode.
Bang! Bang! Bang! went the gunpowder.
There was no doubt about it.
But nobody heard him, not even the two little boys, for they were sound asleep.
Then all that was left of him was the stick, and this fell down on the back of a Goose who was taking a walk by the side of the ditch.
"Good heavens!" cried the Goose.
"It is going to rain sticks"; and she rushed into the water.
"I knew I should create a great sensation," gasped the Rocket, and he went out.

THE YOUNG KING
It was the night before the day fixed for his coronation, and the young King was sitting alone in his beautiful chamber. 
His courtiers had all taken their leave of him, bowing their heads to the ground, according to the ceremonious usage of the day, and had retired to the Great Hall of the Palace, to receive a few last lessons from the Professor of Etiquette; there being some of them who had still quite natural manners, which in a courtier is, I need hardly say, a very grave offence. 
The lad—for he was only a lad, being but sixteen years of age—was not sorry at their departure, and had flung himself back with a deep sigh of relief on the soft cushions of his embroidered couch, lying there, wild–eyed and open–mouthed, like a brown woodland Faun, or some young animal of the forest newly snared by the hunters. 
And, indeed, it was the hunters who had found him, coming upon him almost by chance as, bare–limbed and pipe in hand, he was following the flock of the poor goatherd who had brought him up, and whose son he had always fancied himself to be. 
The child of the old King’s only daughter by a secret marriage with one much beneath her in station—a stranger, some said, who, by the wonderful magic of his lute–playing, had made the young Princess love him; while others spoke of an artist from Rimini, to whom the Princess had shown much, perhaps too much honour, and who had suddenly disappeared from the city, leaving his work in the Cathedral unfinished—he had been, when but a week old, stolen away from his mother’s side, as she slept, and given into the charge of a common peasant and his wife, who were without children of their own, and lived in a remote part of the forest, more than a day’s ride from the town. 
Grief, or the plague, as the court physician stated, or, as some suggested, a swift Italian poison administered in a cup of spiced wine, slew, within an hour of her wakening, the white girl who had given him birth, and as the trusty messenger who bare the child across his saddle–bow stooped from his weary horse and knocked at the rude door of the goatherd’s hut, the body of the Princess was being lowered into an open grave that had been dug in a deserted churchyard, beyond the city gates, a grave where it was said that another body was also lying, that of a young man of marvellous and foreign beauty, whose hands were tied behind him with a knotted cord, and whose breast was stabbed with many red wounds. 
Such, at least, was the story that men whispered to each other. 
Certain it was that the old King, when on his deathbed, whether moved by remorse for his great sin, or merely desiring that the kingdom should not pass away from his line, had had the lad sent for, and, in the presence of the Council, had acknowledged him as his heir. 
And it seems that from the very first moment of his recognition he had shown signs of that strange passion for beauty that was destined to have so great an influence over his life. 
Those who accompanied him to the suite of rooms set apart for his service, often spoke of the cry of pleasure that broke from his lips when he saw the delicate raiment and rich jewels that had been prepared for him, and of the almost fierce joy with which he flung aside his rough leathern tunic and coarse sheepskin cloak. 
He missed, indeed, at times the fine freedom of his forest life, and was always apt to chafe at the tedious Court ceremonies that occupied so much of each day, but the wonderful palace—Joyeuse, as they called it—of which he now found himself lord, seemed to him to be a new world fresh–fashioned for his delight; and as soon as he could escape from the council– board or audience–chamber, he would run down the great staircase, with its lions of gilt bronze and its steps of bright porphyry, and wander from room to room, and from corridor to corridor, like one who was seeking to find in beauty an anodyne from pain, a sort of restoration from sickness. 
Upon these journeys of discovery, as he would call them—and, indeed, they were to him real voyages through a marvellous land, he would sometimes be accompanied by the slim, fair–haired Court pages, with their floating mantles, and gay fluttering ribands; but more often he would be alone, feeling through a certain quick instinct, which was almost a divination, that the secrets of art are best learned in secret, and that Beauty, like Wisdom, loves the lonely worshipper. 
Many curious stories were related about him at this period. 
It was said that a stout Burgomaster, who had come to deliver a florid oratorical address on behalf of the citizens of the town, had caught sight of him kneeling in real adoration before a great picture that had just been brought from Venice, and that seemed to herald the worship of some new gods. 
On another occasion he had been missed for several hours, and after a lengthened search had been discovered in a little chamber in one of the northern turrets of the palace gazing, as one in a trance, at a Greek gem carved with the figure of Adonis. 
He had been seen, so the tale ran, pressing his warm lips to the marble brow of an antique statue that had been discovered in the bed of the river on the occasion of the building of the stone bridge, and was inscribed with the name of the Bithynian slave of Hadrian. 
He had passed a whole night in noting the effect of the moonlight on a silver image of Endymion. 
All rare and costly materials had certainly a great fascination for him, and in his eagerness to procure them he had sent away many merchants, some to traffic for amber with the rough fisher–folk of the north seas, some to Egypt to look for that curious green turquoise which is found only in the tombs of kings, and is said to possess magical properties, some to Persia for silken carpets and painted pottery, and others to India to buy gauze and stained ivory, moonstones and bracelets of jade, sandal–wood and blue enamel and shawls of fine wool. 
But what had occupied him most was the robe he was to wear at his coronation, the robe of tissued gold, and the ruby–studded crown, and the sceptre with its rows and rings of pearls. 
Indeed, it was of this that he was thinking to–night, as he lay back on his luxurious couch, watching the great pinewood log that was burning itself out on the open hearth. 
The designs, which were from the hands of the most famous artists of the time, had been submitted to him many months before, and he had given orders that the artificers were to toil night and day to carry them out, and that the whole world was to be searched for jewels that would be worthy of their work. 
He saw himself in fancy standing at the high altar of the cathedral in the fair raiment of a King, and a smile played and lingered about his boyish lips, and lit up with a bright lustre his dark woodland eyes. 
After some time he rose from his seat, and leaning against the carved penthouse of the chimney, looked round at the dimly–lit room. 
The walls were hung with rich tapestries representing the Triumph of Beauty. 
A large press, inlaid with agate and lapis–lazuli, filled one corner, and facing the window stood a curiously wrought cabinet with lacquer panels of powdered and mosaiced gold, on which were placed some delicate goblets of Venetian glass, and a cup of dark–veined onyx. 
Pale poppies were broidered on the silk coverlet of the bed, as though they had fallen from the tired hands of sleep, and tall reeds of fluted ivory bare up the velvet canopy, from which great tufts of ostrich plumes sprang, like white foam, to the pallid silver of the fretted ceiling. 
A laughing Narcissus in green bronze held a polished mirror above its head. 
On the table stood a flat bowl of amethyst. 
Outside he could see the huge dome of the cathedral, looming like a bubble over the shadowy houses, and the weary sentinels pacing up and down on the misty terrace by the river. 
Far away, in an orchard, a nightingale was singing. 
A faint perfume of jasmine came through the open window. 
He brushed his brown curls back from his forehead, and taking up a lute, let his fingers stray across the cords. 
His heavy eyelids drooped, and a strange languor came over him. 
Never before had he felt so keenly, or with such exquisite joy, the magic and the mystery of beautiful things. 
When midnight sounded from the clock–tower he touched a bell, and his pages entered and disrobed him with much ceremony, pouring rose–water over his hands, and strewing flowers on his pillow. 
A few moments after that they had left the room, he fell asleep. 
And as he slept he dreamed a dream, and this was his dream. 
He thought that he was standing in a long, low attic, amidst the whir and clatter of many looms. 
The meagre daylight peered in through the grated windows, and showed him the gaunt figures of the weavers bending over their cases. 
Pale, sickly–looking children were crouched on the huge crossbeams. 
As the shuttles dashed through the warp they lifted up the heavy battens, and when the shuttles stopped they let the battens fall and pressed the threads together. 
Their faces were pinched with famine, and their thin hands shook and trembled. 
Some haggard women were seated at a table sewing. 
A horrible odour filled the place. 
The air was foul and heavy, and the walls dripped and streamed with damp. 
The young King went over to one of the weavers, and stood by him and watched him. 
And the weaver looked at him angrily, and said, 'Why art thou watching me?
Art thou a spy set on us by our master?'
'Who is thy master?' asked the young King. 
 'Our master!' cried the weaver, bitterly. 
 'He is a man like myself. 
Indeed, there is but this difference between us—that he wears fine clothes while I go in rags, and that while I am weak from hunger he suffers not a little from overfeeding. 
'The land is free,' said the young King, 'and thou art no man’s slave. 
'In war,' answered the weaver, 'the strong make slaves of the weak, and in peace the rich make slaves of the poor. 
We must work to live, and they give us such mean wages that we die. 
We toil for them all day long, and they heap up gold in their coffers, and our children fade away before their time, and the faces of those we love become hard and evil. 
We tread out the grapes, and another drinks the wine. 
We sow the corn, and our own board is empty. 
We have chains, though no eye beholds them; and are slaves, though men call us free. 
'Is it so with all?' he asked, 'It is so with all,' answered the weaver, 'with the young as well as with the old, with the women as well as with the men, with the little children as well as with those who are stricken in years. 
The merchants grind us down, and we must needs do their bidding. 
The priest rides by and tells his beads, and no man has care of us. 
Through our sunless lanes creeps Poverty with her hungry eyes, and Sin with his sodden face follows close behind her. 
Misery wakes us in the morning, and Shame sits with us at night. 
But what are these things to thee?
Thou art not one of us. 
Thy face is too happy. 
' And he turned away scowling, and threw the shuttle across the loom, and the young King saw that it was threaded with a thread of gold. 
And a great terror seized upon him, and he said to the weaver, 'What robe is this that thou art weaving?'
'It is the robe for the coronation of the young King,' he answered; 'what is that to thee?'
And the young King gave a loud cry and woke, and lo! he was in his own chamber, and through the window he saw the great honey–coloured moon hanging in the dusky air. 
And he fell asleep again and dreamed, and this was his dream. 
He thought that he was lying on the deck of a huge galley that was being rowed by a hundred slaves. 
On a carpet by his side the master of the galley was seated. 
He was black as ebony, and his turban was of crimson silk. 
Great earrings of silver dragged down the thick lobes of his ears, and in his hands he had a pair of ivory scales. 
The slaves were naked, but for a ragged loin–cloth, and each man was chained to his neighbour. 
The hot sun beat brightly upon them, and the negroes ran up and down the gangway and lashed them with whips of hide. 
They stretched out their lean arms and pulled the heavy oars through the water. 
The salt spray flew from the blades. 
At last they reached a little bay, and began to take soundings. 
A light wind blew from the shore, and covered the deck and the great lateen sail with a fine red dust. 
Three Arabs mounted on wild asses rode out and threw spears at them. 
The master of the galley took a painted bow in his hand and shot one of them in the throat. 
He fell heavily into the surf, and his companions galloped away. 
A woman wrapped in a yellow veil followed slowly on a camel, looking back now and then at the dead body. 
As soon as they had cast anchor and hauled down the sail, the negroes went into the hold and brought up a long rope–ladder, heavily weighted with lead. 
The master of the galley threw it over the side, making the ends fast to two iron stanchions. 
Then the negroes seized the youngest of the slaves and knocked his gyves off, and filled his nostrils and his ears with wax, and tied a big stone round his waist. 
He crept wearily down the ladder, and disappeared into the sea. 
A few bubbles rose where he sank. 
Some of the other slaves peered curiously over the side. 
At the prow of the galley sat a shark–charmer, beating monotonously upon a drum. 
After some time the diver rose up out of the water, and clung panting to the ladder with a pearl in his right hand. 
The negroes seized it from him, and thrust him back. 
The slaves fell asleep over their oars. 
Again and again he came up, and each time that he did so he brought with him a beautiful pearl. 
The master of the galley weighed them, and put them into a little bag of green leather. 
The young King tried to speak, but his tongue seemed to cleave to the roof of his mouth, and his lips refused to move. 
The negroes chattered to each other, and began to quarrel over a string of bright beads. 
Two cranes flew round and round the vessel. 
Then the diver came up for the last time, and the pearl that he brought with him was fairer than all the pearls of Ormuz, for it was shaped like the full moon, and whiter than the morning star. 
But his face was strangely pale, and as he fell upon the deck the blood gushed from his ears and nostrils. 
He quivered for a little, and then he was still. 
The negroes shrugged their shoulders, and threw the body overboard. 
And the master of the galley laughed, and, reaching out, he took the pearl, and when he saw it he pressed it to his forehead and bowed. 
 'It shall be,' he said, 'for the sceptre of the young King,' and he made a sign to the negroes to draw up the anchor. 
And when the young King heard this he gave a great cry, and woke, and through the window he saw the long grey fingers of the dawn clutching at the fading stars. 
And he fell asleep again, and dreamed, and this was his dream. 
He thought that he was wandering through a dim wood, hung with strange fruits and with beautiful poisonous flowers. 
The adders hissed at him as he went by, and the bright parrots flew screaming from branch to branch. 
Huge tortoises lay asleep upon the hot mud. 
The trees were full of apes and peacocks. 
On and on he went, till he reached the outskirts of the wood, and there he saw an immense multitude of men toiling in the bed of a dried–up river. 
They swarmed up the crag like ants. 
They dug deep pits in the ground and went down into them. 
Some of them cleft the rocks with great axes; others grabbled in the sand. 
They tore up the cactus by its roots, and trampled on the scarlet blossoms. 
They hurried about, calling to each other, and no man was idle. 
From the darkness of a cavern Death and Avarice watched them, and Death said, 'I am weary; give me a third of them and let me go. 
' But Avarice shook her head. 
 'They are my servants,' she answered. 
And Death said to her, 'What hast thou in thy hand?'
'I have three grains of corn,' she answered; 'what is that to thee?'
'Give me one of them,' cried Death, 'to plant in my garden; only one of them, and I will go away. '
'I will not give thee anything,' said Avarice, and she hid her hand in the fold of her raiment. 
And Death laughed, and took a cup, and dipped it into a pool of water, and out of the cup rose Ague. 
She passed through the great multitude, and a third of them lay dead. 
A cold mist followed her, and the water–snakes ran by her side. 
And when Avarice saw that a third of the multitude was dead she beat her breast and wept. 
She beat her barren bosom, and cried aloud. 
'Thou hast slain a third of my servants,' she cried, 'get thee gone. 
There is war in the mountains of Tartary, and the kings of each side are calling to thee. 
The Afghans have slain the black ox, and are marching to battle. 
They have beaten upon their shields with their spears, and have put on their helmets of iron. 
What is my valley to thee, that thou should’st tarry in it? Get thee gone, and come here no more. 
'Nay,' answered Death, 'but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I will not go. 
But Avarice shut her hand, and clenched her teeth. 
 'I will not give thee anything,' she muttered. 
And Death laughed, and took up a black stone, and threw it into the forest, and out of a thicket of wild hemlock came Fever in a robe of flame. 
She passed through the multitude, and touched them, and each man that she touched died. 
The grass withered beneath her feet as she walked. 
And Avarice shuddered, and put ashes on her head. 
'Thou art cruel,' she cried;
'thou art cruel. 
There is famine in the walled cities of India, and the cisterns of Samarcand have run dry. 
There is famine in the walled cities of Egypt, and the locusts have come up from the desert. 
The Nile has not overflowed its banks, and the priests have cursed Isis and Osiris. 
Get thee gone to those who need thee, and leave me my servants. 
'Nay,' answered Death, 'but till thou hast given me a grain of corn I will not go. '
'I will not give thee anything,' said Avarice. 
And Death laughed again, and he whistled through his fingers, and a woman came flying through the air. 
Plague was written upon her forehead, and a crowd of lean vultures wheeled round her. 
She covered the valley with her wings, and no man was left alive. 
And Avarice fled shrieking through the forest, and Death leaped upon his red horse and galloped away, and his galloping was faster than the wind. 
And out of the slime at the bottom of the valley crept dragons and horrible things with scales, and the jackals came trotting along the sand, sniffing up the air with their nostrils. 
And the young King wept, and said: 'Who were these men, and for what were they seeking?'
'For rubies for a king’s crown,' answered one who stood behind him. 
And the young King started, and, turning round, he saw a man habited as a pilgrim and holding in his hand a mirror of silver. 
And he grew pale, and said: 'For what king?'
And the pilgrim answered: 'Look in this mirror, and thou shalt see him.'
And he looked in the mirror, and, seeing his own face, he gave a great cry and woke, and the bright sunlight was streaming into the room, and from the trees of the garden and pleasaunce the birds were singing. 
And the Chamberlain and the high officers of State came in and made obeisance to him, and the pages brought him the robe of tissued gold, and set the crown and the sceptre before him. 
And the young King looked at them, and they were beautiful. 
More beautiful were they than aught that he had ever seen. 
But he remembered his dreams, and he said to his lords: 'Take these things away, for I will not wear them. '
And the courtiers were amazed, and some of them laughed, for they thought that he was jesting. 
But he spake sternly to them again, and said: 'Take these things away, and hide them from me. 
Though it be the day of my coronation, I will not wear them. 
For on the loom of Sorrow, and by the white hands of Pain, has this my robe been woven. 
There is Blood in the heart of the ruby, and Death in the heart of the pearl. 
' And he told them his three dreams. 
And when the courtiers heard them they looked at each other and whispered, saying: 'Surely he is mad; for what is a dream but a dream, and a vision but a vision? They are not real things that one should heed them. 
And what have we to do with the lives of those who toil for us? Shall a man not eat bread till he has seen the sower, nor drink wine till he has talked with the vinedresser?'
And the Chamberlain spake to the young King, and said, 'My lord, I pray thee set aside these black thoughts of thine, and put on this fair robe, and set this crown upon thy head. 
For how shall the people know that thou art a king, if thou hast not a king’s raiment?'
And the young King looked at him. 
 'Is it so, indeed?' he questioned. 
 'Will they not know me for a king if I have not a king’s raiment?'
'They will not know thee, my lord,' cried the Chamberlain. 
'I had thought that there had been men who were kinglike,' he answered, 'but it may be as thou sayest. 
And yet I will not wear this robe, nor will I be crowned with this crown, but even as I came to the palace so will I go forth from it. 
And he bade them all leave him, save one page whom he kept as his companion, a lad a year younger than himself. 
Him he kept for his service, and when he had bathed himself in clear water, he opened a great painted chest, and from it he took the leathern tunic and rough sheepskin cloak that he had worn when he had watched on the hillside the shaggy goats of the goatherd. 
These he put on, and in his hand he took his rude shepherd’s staff. 
And the little page opened his big blue eyes in wonder, and said smiling to him, 'My lord, I see thy robe and thy sceptre, but where is thy crown?'
And the young King plucked a spray of wild briar that was climbing over the balcony, and bent it, and made a circlet of it, and set it on his own head. 
'This shall he my crown,' he answered. 
And thus attired he passed out of his chamber into the Great Hall, where the nobles were waiting for him. 
And the nobles made merry, and some of them cried out to him, 'My lord, the people wait for their king, and thou showest them a beggar,' and others were wroth and said, 'He brings shame upon our state, and is unworthy to be our master.' 
But he answered them not a word, but passed on, and went down the bright porphyry staircase, and out through the gates of bronze, and mounted upon his horse, and rode towards the cathedral, the little page running beside him. 
And the people laughed and said, 'It is the King’s fool who is riding by,' and they mocked him. 
And he drew rein and said, 'Nay, but I am the King. 
' And he told them his three dreams. 
And a man came out of the crowd and spake bitterly to him, and said, 'Sir, knowest thou not that out of the luxury of the rich cometh the life of the poor?
By your pomp we are nurtured, and your vices give us bread. 
To toil for a hard master is bitter, but to have no master to toil for is more bitter still. 
 Thinkest thou that the ravens will feed us? And what cure hast thou for these things? 
Wilt thou say to the buyer, "Thou shalt buy for so much," and to the seller, "Thou shalt sell at this price"? I trow not. 
Therefore go back to thy Palace and put on thy purple and fine linen. 
 What hast thou to do with us, and what we suffer?'
'Are not the rich and the poor brothers?' asked the young King. 
'Ay,' answered the man, 'and the name of the rich brother is Cain. 
And the young King’s eyes filled with tears, and he rode on through the murmurs of the people, and the little page grew afraid and left him. 
And when he reached the great portal of the cathedral, the soldiers thrust their halberts out and said, 'What dost thou seek here? None enters by this door but the King.'
And his face flushed with anger, and he said to them, 'I am the King,' and waved their halberts aside and passed in. 
And when the old Bishop saw him coming in his goatherd’s dress, he rose up in wonder from his throne, and went to meet him, and said to him, 'My son, is this a king’s apparel? And with what crown shall I crown thee, and what sceptre shall I place in thy hand? Surely this should be to thee a day of joy, and not a day of abasement.'
'Shall Joy wear what Grief has fashioned?' said the young King. 
 And he told him his three dreams. 
And when the Bishop had heard them he knit his brows, and said, 'My son, I am an old man, and in the winter of my days, and I know that many evil things are done in the wide world. 
The fierce robbers come down from the mountains, and carry off the little children, and sell them to the Moors. 
The lions lie in wait for the caravans, and leap upon the camels. 
The wild boar roots up the corn in the valley, and the foxes gnaw the vines upon the hill. 
The pirates lay waste the sea–coast and burn the ships of the fishermen, and take their nets from them. 
In the salt–marshes live the lepers; they have houses of wattled reeds, and none may come nigh them. 
The beggars wander through the cities, and eat their food with the dogs. 
Canst thou make these things not to be? Wilt thou take the leper for thy bedfellow, and set the beggar at thy board? Shall the lion do thy bidding, and the wild boar obey thee? Is not He who made misery wiser than thou art?
Wherefore I praise thee not for this that thou hast done, but I bid thee ride back to the Palace and make thy face glad, and put on the raiment that beseemeth a king, and with the crown of gold I will crown thee, and the sceptre of pearl will I place in thy hand. 
 And as for thy dreams, think no more of them. 
 The burden of this world is too great for one man to bear, and the world’s sorrow too heavy for
one heart to suffer. 
'Sayest thou that in this house?' said the young King, and he strode past the Bishop, and climbed up the steps of the altar, and stood before the image of Christ. 
He stood before the image of Christ, and on his right hand and on his left were the marvellous vessels of gold, the chalice with the yellow wine, and the vial with the holy oil. 
He knelt before the image of Christ, and the great candles burned brightly by the jewelled shrine, and the smoke of the incense curled in thin blue wreaths through the dome. 
He bowed his head in prayer, and the priests in their stiff copes crept away from the altar. 
And suddenly a wild tumult came from the street outside, and in entered the nobles with drawn swords and nodding plumes, and shields of polished steel. 
'Where is this dreamer of dreams?' they cried. 
'Where is this King who is apparelled like a beggar—this boy who brings shame upon our state? Surely we will slay him, for he is unworthy to rule over us.'
And the young King bowed his head again, and prayed, and when he had finished his prayer he rose up, and turning round he looked at them sadly. 
And lo! through the painted windows came the sunlight streaming upon him, and the sun–beams wove round him a tissued robe that was fairer than the robe that had been fashioned for his pleasure. 
The dead staff blossomed, and bare lilies that were whiter than pearls. 
The dry thorn blossomed, and bare roses that were redder than rubies. 
Whiter than fine pearls were the lilies, and their stems were of bright silver. 
Redder than male rubies were the roses, and their leaves were of beaten gold. 
He stood there in the raiment of a king, and the gates of the jewelled shrine flew open, and from the crystal of the many–rayed monstrance shone a marvellous and mystical light. 
He stood there in a king’s raiment, and the Glory of God filled the place, and the saints in their carven niches seemed to move. 
In the fair raiment of a king he stood before them, and the organ pealed out its music, and the trumpeters blew upon their trumpets, and the singing boys sang. 
And the people fell upon their knees in awe, and the nobles sheathed their swords and did homage, and the Bishop’s face grew pale, and his hands trembled. 
 'A greater than I hath crowned thee,' he cried, and he knelt before him. 
And the young King came down from the high altar, and passed home through the midst of the people. 
But no man dared look upon his face, for it was like the face of an angel. 

THE BIRTHDAY OF THE INFANTA
It was the birthday of the Infanta. She was just twelve years of age, and the sun was shining brightly in the gardens of the palace.
Although she was a real Princess and the Infanta of Spain, she had only one birthday every year, just like the children of quite poor people, so it was naturally a matter of great importance to the whole country that she should have a really fine day for the occasion. And a really fine day it certainly was. 
The tall striped tulips stood straight up upon their stalks, like long rows of soldiers, and looked defiantly across the grass at the roses, and said: 'We are quite as splendid as you are now.' 
The purple butterflies fluttered about with gold dust on their wings, visiting each flower in turn; the little lizards crept out of the crevices of the wall, and lay basking in the white glare; and the pomegranates split and cracked with the heat, and showed their bleeding red hearts. 
Even the pale yellow lemons, that hung in such profusion from the mouldering trellis and along the dim arcades, seemed to have caught a richer colour from the wonderful sunlight, and the magnolia trees opened their great globe–like blossoms of folded ivory, and filled the air with a sweet heavy perfume.
The little Princess herself walked up and down the terrace with her companions, and played at hide and seek round the stone vases and the old moss–grown statues.
On ordinary days she was only allowed to play with children of her own rank, so she had always to play alone, but her birthday was an exception, and the King had given orders that she was to invite any of her young friends whom she liked to come and amuse themselves with her. 
There was a stately grace about these slim Spanish children as they glided about, the boys with their large–plumed hats and short fluttering cloaks, the girls holding up the trains of their long brocaded gowns, and shielding the sun from their eyes with huge fans of black and silver.
But the Infanta was the most graceful of all, and the most tastefully attired, after the somewhat cumbrous fashion of the day.
Her robe was of grey satin, the skirt and the wide puffed sleeves heavily embroidered with silver, and the stiff corset studded with rows of fine pearls.
Two tiny slippers with big pink rosettes peeped out beneath her dress as she walked.
Pink and pearl was her great gauze fan, and in her hair, which like an aureole of faded gold stood out stiffly round her pale little face, she had a beautiful white rose.
From a window in the palace the sad melancholy King watched them. 
Behind him stood his brother, Don Pedro of Aragon, whom he hated, and his confessor, the Grand Inquisitor of Granada, sat by his side. 
Sadder even than usual was the King, for as he looked at the Infanta bowing with childish gravity to the assembling counters, or laughing behind her fan at the grim Duchess of Albuquerque who always accompanied her, he thought of the young Queen, her mother, who but a short time before—so it seemed to him—had come from the gay country of France, and had withered away in the sombre splendour of the Spanish court, dying just six months after the birth of her child, and before she had seen the almonds blossom twice in the orchard, or plucked the second year’s fruit from the old gnarled fig–tree that stood in the centre of the now grass–grown courtyard. 
So great had been his love for her that he had not suffered even the grave to hide her from him.
She had been embalmed by a Moorish physician, who in return for this service had been granted his life, which for heresy and suspicion of magical practices had been already forfeited, men said, to the Holy Office, and her body was still lying on its tapestried bier in the black marble chapel of the Palace, just as the monks had borne her in on that windy March day nearly twelve years before.
Once every month the King, wrapped in a dark cloak and with a muffled lantern in his hand, went in and knelt by her side calling out, 'Mi reina! Mi reina!' and sometimes breaking through the formal etiquette that in Spain governs every separate action of life, and sets limits even to the sorrow of a King, he would clutch at the pale jewelled hands in a wild agony of grief, and try to wake by his mad kisses the cold painted face.
To–day he seemed to see her again, as he had seen her first at the Castle of Fontainebleau, when he was but fifteen years of age, and she still younger. 
They had been formally betrothed on that occasion by the Papal Nuncio in the presence of the French King and all the Court, and he had returned to the Escurial bearing with him a little ringlet of yellow hair, and the memory of two childish lips bending down to kiss his hand as he stepped into his carriage.
Later on had followed the marriage, hastily performed at Burgos, a small town on the frontier between the two countries, and the grand public entry into Madrid with the customary celebration of high mass at the Church of La Atocha, and a more than usually solemn auto–da–fe, in which nearly three hundred heretics, amongst whom were many Englishmen, had been delivered over to the secular arm to be burned.
Certainly he had loved her madly, and to the ruin, many thought, of his country, then at war with England for the possession of the empire of the New World. 
He had hardly ever permitted her to be out of his sight; for her, he had forgotten, or seemed to have forgotten, all grave affairs of State; and, with that terrible blindness that passion brings upon its servants, he had failed to notice that the elaborate ceremonies by which he sought to please her did but aggravate the strange malady from which she suffered. 
When she died he was, for a time, like one bereft of reason. Indeed, there is no doubt but that he would have formally abdicated and retired to the great Trappist monastery at Granada, of which he was already titular Prior, had he not been afraid to leave the little Infanta at the mercy of his brother, whose cruelty, even in Spain, was notorious, and who was suspected by many of having caused the Queen’s death by means of a pair of poisoned gloves that he had presented to her on the occasion of her visiting his castle in Aragon. 
Even after the expiration of the three years of public mourning that he had ordained throughout his whole dominions by royal edict, he would never suffer his ministers to speak about any new alliance, and when the Emperor himself sent to him, and offered him the hand of the lovely Archduchess of Bohemia, his niece, in marriage, he bade the ambassadors tell their master that the King of Spain was already wedded to Sorrow, and that though she was but a barren bride he loved her better than Beauty; an answer that cost his crown the rich provinces of the Netherlands, which soon after, at the Emperor’s instigation, revolted against him under the leadership of some fanatics of the Reformed Church.
His whole married life, with its fierce, fiery–coloured joys and the terrible agony of its sudden ending, seemed to come back to him to–day as he watched the Infanta playing on the terrace.
She had all the Queen’s pretty petulance of manner, the same wilful way of tossing her head, the same proud curved beautiful mouth, the same wonderful smile—vrai sourire de France indeed—as she glanced up now and then at the window, or stretched out her little hand for the stately Spanish gentlemen to kiss. 
But the shrill laughter of the children grated on his ears, and the bright pitiless sunlight mocked his sorrow, and a dull odour of strange spices, spices such as embalmers use, seemed to taint—or was it fancy?—the clear morning air. 
He buried his face in his hands, and when the Infanta looked up again the curtains had been drawn, and the King had retired.
She made a little moue of disappointment, and shrugged her shoulders. Surely he might have stayed with her on her birthday.
What did the stupid State–affairs matter? Or had he gone to that gloomy chapel, where the candles were always burning, and where she was never allowed to enter? 
How silly of him, when the sun was shining so brightly, and everybody was so happy! 
Besides, he would miss the sham bull–fight for which the trumpet was already sounding, to say
nothing of the puppet–show and the other wonderful things. 
Her uncle and the Grand Inquisitor were much more sensible. 
They had come out on the terrace, and paid her nice compliments. 
So she tossed her pretty head, and taking Don Pedro by the hand, she walked slowly down the steps towards a long pavilion of purple silk that had been erected at the end of the garden, the other children following in strict order of precedence, those who had the longest names going first.
A procession of noble boys, fantastically dressed as toreadors, came out to meet her, and the young Count of Tierra–Nueva, a wonderfully handsome lad of about fourteen years of age, uncovering his head with all the grace of a born hidalgo and grandee of Spain, led her solemnly in to a little gilt and ivory chair that was placed on a raised dais above the arena. 
The children grouped themselves all round, fluttering their big fans and whispering to each other, and Don Pedro and the Grand Inquisitor stood laughing at the entrance.
Even the Duchess—the Camerera–Mayor as she was called—a thin, hard–featured woman with a yellow ruff, did not look quite so bad–tempered as usual, and something like a chill smile flitted across her wrinkled face and twitched her thin bloodless lips.
It certainly was a marvellous bull–fight, and much nicer, the Infanta thought, than the real bull–fight that she had been brought to see at Seville, on the occasion of the visit of the Duke of Parma to her father.
Some of the boys pranced about on richly–caparisoned hobby–horses brandishing long javelins with gay streamers of bright ribands attached to them; others went on foot waving their scarlet cloaks before the bull, and vaulting lightly over the barrier when he charged them; and as for the bull himself, he was just like a live bull, though he was only made of wicker–work and stretched hide, and sometimes insisted on running round the arena on his hind legs, which no live bull ever dreams of doing.
He made a splendid fight of it too, and the children got so excited that they stood up upon the benches, and waved their lace handkerchiefs and cried out: Bravo toro! Bravo toro! just as sensibly as if they had been grown–up people.
At last, however, after a prolonged combat, during which several of the hobby–horses were gored through and through, and, their riders dismounted, the young Count of Tierra–Nueva brought the bull to his knees, and having obtained permission from the Infanta to give the coup de grace, he plunged his wooden sword into the neck of the animal with such violence that the head came right off, and disclosed the laughing face of little Monsieur de Lorraine, the son of the French Ambassador at Madrid.
The arena was then cleared amidst much applause, and the dead hobbyhorses dragged solemnly away by two Moorish pages in yellow and black liveries, and after a short interlude, during which a French posture–master performed upon the tightrope, some Italian puppets appeared in the semi–classical tragedy of Sophonisba on the stage of a small theatre that had been built up for the purpose.
They acted so well, and their gestures were so extremely natural, that at the close of the play the eyes of the Infanta were quite dim with tears. Indeed some of the children really cried, and had to be comforted with sweetmeats, and the Grand Inquisitor himself was so affected that he could not help saying to Don Pedro that it seemed to him intolerable that things made simply out of wood and coloured wax, and worked mechanically by wires, should be so unhappy and meet with such terrible misfortunes.
An African juggler followed, who brought in a large flat basket covered with a red cloth, and having placed it in the centre of the arena, he took from his turban a curious reed pipe, and blew through it.
In a few moments the cloth began to move, and as the pipe grew shriller and shriller two green and gold snakes put out their strange wedge–shaped heads and rose slowly up, swaying to and fro with the music as a plant sways in the water.
The children, however, were rather frightened at their spotted hoods and quick darting tongues, and were much more pleased when the juggler made a tiny orange–tree grow out of the sand and bear pretty white blossoms and clusters of real fruit; and when he took the fan of the little daughter of the Marquess de Las–Torres, and changed it into a blue bird that flew all round the pavilion and sang, their delight and amazement knew no bounds.
The solemn minuet, too, performed by the dancing boys from the church of Nuestra Senora Del Pilar, was charming. 
The Infanta had never before seen this wonderful ceremony which takes place every year at Maytime in front of the high altar of the Virgin, and in her honour; and indeed none of the royal family of Spain had entered the great cathedral of Saragossa since a mad priest, supposed by many to have been in the pay of Elizabeth of England, had tried to administer a poisoned wafer to the Prince of the Asturias.
So she had known only by hearsay of 'Our Lady’s Dance,' as it was called, and it certainly was a beautiful sight.
The boys wore old–fashioned court dresses of white velvet, and their curious three–cornered hats were fringed with silver and surmounted with huge plumes of ostrich feathers, the dazzling whiteness of their costumes, as they moved about in the sunlight, being still more accentuated by their swarthy faces and long black hair.
Everybody was fascinated by the grave dignity with which they moved through the intricate figures of the dance, and by the elaborate grace of their slow gestures, and stately bows, and when they had finished their performance and doffed their great plumed hats to the Infanta, she acknowledged their reverence with much courtesy, and made a vow that she would send a large wax candle to the shrine of Our Lady of Pilar in return for the pleasure that she had given her.
A troop of handsome Egyptians—as the gipsies were termed in those days—then advanced into the arena, and sitting down cross–legs, in a circle, began to play softly upon their zithers, moving their bodies to the tune, and humming, almost below their breath, a low dreamy air.
When they caught sight of Don Pedro they scowled at him, and some of them looked terrified, for only a few weeks before he had had two of their tribe hanged for sorcery in the market– place at Seville, but the pretty Infanta charmed them as she leaned back peeping over her fan with her great blue eyes, and they felt sure that one so lovely as she was could never be cruel to anybody. 
So they played on very gently and just touching the cords of the zithers with their long pointed nails, and their heads began to nod as though they were falling asleep. 
Suddenly, with a cry so shrill that all the children were startled and Don Pedro’s hand clutched at the agate pommel of his dagger, they leapt to their feet and whirled madly round the enclosure beating their tambourines, and chaunting some wild love–song in their strange guttural language. 
Then at another signal they all flung themselves again to the ground and lay there quite still, the dull strumming of the zithers being the only sound that broke the silence. 
After that they had done this several times, they disappeared for a moment and came back leading a brown shaggy bear by a chain, and carrying on their shoulders some little Barbary apes. 
The bear stood upon his head with the utmost gravity, and the wizened apes played all kinds of amusing tricks with two gipsy boys who seemed to be their masters, and fought with tiny swords, and fired off guns, and went through a regular soldier’s drill just like the King’s own bodyguard. 
In fact the gipsies were a great success.
But the funniest part of the whole morning’s entertainment, was undoubtedly the dancing of the little Dwarf. 
When he stumbled into the arena, waddling on his crooked legs and wagging his huge misshapen head from side to side, the children went off into a loud shout of delight, and the Infanta herself laughed so much that the Camerera was obliged to remind her that although there were many precedents in Spain for a King’s daughter weeping before her equals, there were none for a Princess of the blood royal making so merry before those who were her inferiors in birth. 
The Dwarf, however, was really quite irresistible, and even at the Spanish Court, always noted for its cultivated passion for the horrible, so fantastic a little monster had never been seen. 
It was his first appearance, too. 
He had been discovered only the day before, running wild through the forest, by two of the nobles who happened to have been hunting in a remote part of the great cork–wood that surrounded the town, and had been carried off by them to the Palace as a surprise for the Infanta; his father, who was a poor charcoal–burner, being but too well pleased to get rid of so ugly and
useless a child. 
Perhaps the most amusing thing about him was his complete unconsciousness of his own grotesque appearance.
Indeed he seemed quite happy and full of the highest spirits.
When the children laughed, he laughed as freely and as joyously as any of them, and at the close of each dance he made them each the funniest of bows, smiling and nodding at them just as if he was really one of themselves, and not a little misshapen thing that Nature, in some humourous mood, had fashioned for others to mock at.
As for the Infanta, she absolutely fascinated him.
He could not keep his eyes off her, and seemed to dance for her alone, and when at the close of the performance, remembering how she had seen the great ladies of the Court throw bouquets to Caffarelli, the famous Italian treble, whom the Pope had sent from his own chapel to Madrid
that he might cure the King’s melancholy by the sweetness of his voice, she took out of her hair the beautiful white rose, and partly for a jest and partly to tease the Camerera, threw it to him across the arena with her sweetest smile, he took the whole matter quite seriously, and pressing the flower to his rough coarse lips he put his hand upon his heart, and sank on one knee before her, grinning from ear to ear, and with his little bright eyes sparkling with pleasure.
This so upset the gravity of the Infanta that she kept on laughing long after the little Dwarf had ran out of the arena, and expressed a desire to her uncle that the dance should be immediately repeated.
The Camerera, however, on the plea that the sun was too hot, decided that it would be better that her Highness should return without delay to the Palace, where a wonderful feast had been already prepared for her, including a real birthday cake with her own initials worked all over it in painted sugar and a lovely silver flag waving from the top.
The Infanta accordingly rose up with much dignity, and having given orders that the little dwarf was to dance again for her after the hour of siesta, and conveyed her thanks to the young Count of Tierra–Nueva for his charming reception, she went back to her apartments, the children following in the same order in which they had entered.
Now when the little Dwarf heard that he was to dance a second time before the Infanta, and by her own express command, he was so proud that he ran out into the garden, kissing the white rose in an absurd ecstasy of pleasure, and making the most uncouth and clumsy gestures of delight.
The Flowers were quite indignant at his daring to intrude into their beautiful home, and when they saw him capering up and down the walks, and waving his arms above his head in such a ridiculous manner, they could not restrain their feelings any longer. 
'He is really far too ugly to be allowed to play in any place where we are,' cried the Tulips. 
'He should drink poppy–juice, and go to sleep for a thousand years,' said the great scarlet Lilies, and they grew quite hot and angry. 
'He is a perfect horror!' screamed the Cactus. 
'Why, he is twisted and stumpy, and his head is completely out of proportion with his legs. Really he makes me feel prickly all over, and if he comes near me I will sting him with my thorns.' 
'And he has actually got one of my best blooms,' exclaimed the White Rose–Tree. 
'I gave it to the Infanta this morning myself, as a birthday present, and he has stolen it from her.' And she called out: 'Thief, thief, thief!' at the top of her voice.
Even the red Geraniums, who did not usually give themselves airs, and were known to have a great many poor relations themselves, curled up in disgust when they saw him, and when the Violets meekly remarked that though he was certainly extremely plain, still he could not help it, they retorted with a good deal of justice that that was his chief defect, and that there was no reason why one should admire a person because he was incurable; and, indeed, some of the
Violets themselves felt that the ugliness of the little Dwarf was almost ostentatious, and that he would have shown much better taste if he had looked sad, or at least pensive, instead of jumping about merrily, and throwing himself into such grotesque and silly attitudes.
As for the old Sundial, who was an extremely remarkable individual, and had once told the time of day to no less a person than the Emperor Charles V. himself, he was so taken aback by the little Dwarf’s appearance, that he almost forgot to mark two whole minutes with his long shadowy finger, and could not help saying to the great milk–white Peacock, who was sunning herself on the balustrade, that every one knew that the children of Kings were Kings, and that the children of charcoal–burners were charcoal–burners, and that it was absurd to pretend that it wasn’t so; a statement with which the Peacock entirely agreed, and indeed screamed out, 'Certainly, certainly,' in such a loud, harsh voice, that the gold–fish who lived in the basin of the cool splashing fountain put their heads out of the water, and asked the huge stone Tritons what on earth was the matter.
But somehow the Birds liked him. 
They had seen him often in the forest, dancing about like an elf after the eddying leaves, or crouched up in the hollow of some old oak–tree, sharing his nuts with the squirrels. 
They did not mind his being ugly, a bit. Why, even the nightingale herself, who sang so sweetly in the orange groves at night that sometimes the Moon leaned down to listen, was not much to look at after all; and, besides, he had been kind to them, and during that terribly bitter winter, when there were no berries on the trees, and the ground was as hard as iron, and the wolves had come down to the very gates of the city to look for food, he had never once forgotten them, but had always given them crumbs out of his little hunch of black bread, and divided with them whatever poor breakfast he had.
So they flew round and round him, just touching his cheek with their wings as they passed, and chattered to each other, and the little Dwarf was so pleased that he could not help showing them the beautiful white rose, and telling them that the Infanta herself had given it to him because she loved him.
They did not understand a single word of what he was saying, but that made no matter, for they put their heads on one side, and looked wise, which is quite as good as understanding a thing, and very much easier.
The Lizards also took an immense fancy to him, and when he grew tired of running about and flung himself down on the grass to rest, they played and romped all over him, and tried to amuse him in the best way they could. 'Every one cannot be as beautiful as a lizard,' they cried; 'that would be too much to expect. And, though it sounds absurd to say so, he is really not so ugly after all, provided, of course, that one shuts one’s eyes, and does not look at him.' The
Lizards were extremely philosophical by nature, and often sat thinking for hours and hours together, when there was nothing else to do, or when the weather was too rainy for them to go out.
The Flowers, however, were excessively annoyed at their behaviour, and at the behaviour of the birds. 
'It only shows,' they said, 'what a vulgarising effect this incessant rushing and flying about has.
Well–bred people always stay exactly in the same place, as we do. 
No one ever saw us hopping up and down the walks, or galloping madly through the grass after dragon–flies. 
When we do want change of air, we send for the gardener, and he carries us to another bed.
This is dignified, and as it should be.
But birds and lizards have no sense of repose, and indeed birds have not even a permanent address.
They are mere vagrants like the gipsies, and should be treated in exactly the same manner.'
So they put their noses in the air, and looked very haughty, and were quite delighted when after some time they saw the little Dwarf scramble up from the grass, and make his way across the terrace to the palace.
'He should certainly be kept indoors for the rest of his natural life,' they said.
'Look at his hunched back, and his crooked legs,' and they began to titter.
But the little Dwarf knew nothing of all this.
He liked the birds and the lizards immensely, and thought that the flowers were the most marvellous things in the whole world, except of course the Infanta, but then she had given him the beautiful white rose, and she loved him, and that made a great difference.
How he wished that he had gone back with her!
She would have put him on her right hand, and smiled at him, and he would have never left her side, but would have made her his playmate, and taught her all kinds of delightful tricks.
For though he had never been in a palace before, he knew a great many wonderful things.
He could make little cages out of rushes for the grasshoppers to sing in, and fashion the long jointed bamboo into the pipe that Pan loves to hear.
He knew the cry of every bird, and could call the starlings from the tree–top, or the heron from the mere.
He knew the trail of every animal, and could track the hare by its delicate footprints, and the boar by the trampled leaves.
All the wild–dances he knew, the mad dance in red raiment with the autumn, the light dance in blue sandals over the corn, the dance with white snow–wreaths in winter, and the blossom–dance through the orchards in spring.
He knew where the wood–pigeons built their nests, and once when a fowler had snared the parent birds, he had brought up the young ones himself, and had built a little dovecot for them in the cleft of a pollard elm.
They were quite tame, and used to feed out of his hands every morning.
She would like them, and the rabbits that scurried about in the long fern, and the jays with their steely feathers and black bills, and the hedgehogs that could curl themselves up into prickly balls, and the great wise tortoises that crawled slowly about, shaking their heads and nibbling at the young leaves.
Yes, she must certainly come to the forest and play with him.
He would give her his own little bed, and would watch outside the window till dawn, to see that the wild horned cattle did not harm her, nor the gaunt wolves creep too near the hut.
And at dawn he would tap at the shutters and wake her, and they would go out and dance together all the day long.
It was really not a bit lonely in the forest.
Sometimes a Bishop rode through on his white mule, reading out of a painted book.
Sometimes in their green velvet caps, and their jerkins of tanned deerskin, the falconers passed by, with hooded hawks on their wrists.
At vintage–time came the grape–treaders, with purple hands and feet, wreathed with glossy ivy and carrying dripping skins of wine; and the charcoal–burners sat round their huge braziers at night, watching the dry logs charring slowly in the fire, and roasting chestnuts in the ashes, and the robbers came out of their caves and made merry with them.
Once, too, he had seen a beautiful procession winding up the long dusty road to Toledo.
The monks went in front singing sweetly, and carrying bright banners and crosses of gold, and then, in silver armour, with matchlocks and pikes, came the soldiers, and in their midst walked three barefooted men, in strange yellow dresses painted all over with wonderful figures, and carrying lighted candles in their hands.
Certainly there was a great deal to look at in the forest, and when she was tired he would find a soft bank of moss for her, or carry her in his arms, for he was very strong, though he knew that he was not tall.
He would make her a necklace of red bryony berries, that would be quite as pretty as the white berries that she wore on her dress, and when she was tired of them, she could throw them away, and he would find her others.
He would bring her acorn–cups and dew–drenched anemones, and tiny glow–worms to be stars in the pale gold of her hair.
But where was she?
He asked the white rose, and it made him no answer.
The whole palace seemed asleep, and even where the shutters had not been closed, heavy curtains had been drawn across the windows to keep out the glare.
He wandered all round looking for some place through which he might gain an entrance, and at last he caught sight of a little private door that was lying open.
He slipped through, and found himself in a splendid hall, far more splendid, he feared, than the forest, there was so much more gilding everywhere, and even the floor was made of great coloured stones, fitted together into a sort of geometrical pattern.
But the little Infanta was not there, only some wonderful white statues that looked down on him from their jasper pedestals, with sad blank eyes and strangely smiling lips.
At the end of the hall hung a richly embroidered curtain of black velvet, powdered with suns and stars, the King’s favourite devices, and broidered on the colour he loved best.
Perhaps she was hiding behind that?
He would try at any rate.
So he stole quietly across, and drew it aside.
No; there was only another room, though a prettier room, he thought, than the one he had just left.
The walls were hung with a many–figured green arras of needle–wrought tapestry representing a hunt, the work of some Flemish artists who had spent more than seven years in its composition.
It had once been the chamber of Jean le Fou, as he was called, that mad King who was so enamoured of the chase, that he had often tried in his delirium to mount the huge rearing horses, and to drag down the stag on which the great hounds were leaping, sounding his hunting horn, and stabbing with his dagger at the pale flying deer.
It was now used as the council–room, and on the centre table were lying the red portfolios of the ministers, stamped with the gold tulips of Spain, and with the arms and emblems of the house of Hapsburg.
The little Dwarf looked in wonder all round him, and was half–afraid to go on.
The strange silent horsemen that galloped so swiftly through the long glades without making any noise, seemed to him like those terrible phantoms of whom he had heard the charcoal–burners speaking—the Comprachos, who hunt only at night, and if they meet a man, turn him into a hind, and chase him. But he thought of the pretty Infanta, and took courage. He wanted to find her alone, and to tell her that he too loved her. Perhaps she was in the room beyond.
He ran across the soft Moorish carpets, and opened the door. No! She was not here either. The room was quite empty.
It was a throne–room, used for the reception of foreign ambassadors, when the King, which of late had not been often, consented to give them a personal audience; the same room in which, many years before, envoys had appeared from England to make arrangements for the marriage of their Queen, then one of the Catholic sovereigns of Europe, with the Emperor’s eldest son. The hangings were of gilt Cordovan leather, and a heavy gilt chandelier with branches for three hundred wax lights hung down from the black and white ceiling. Underneath a great canopy of gold cloth, on which the lions and towers of Castile were broidered in seed pearls, stood the throne itself, covered with a rich pall of black velvet studded with silver tulips and elaborately fringed with silver and pearls. On the second step of the throne was placed the kneeling–stool of the Infanta, with its cushion of cloth of silver tissue, and below that again, and beyond the limit of the canopy, stood the chair for the Papal Nuncio, who alone had the right to be seated in the King’s presence on the occasion of any public ceremonial, and whose Cardinal’s hat, with its tangled scarlet tassels, lay on a purple tabouret in front. On the wall, facing the throne, hung a life–sized portrait of Charles V. in hunting dress, with a great mastiff by his side, and a picture of Philip II. receiving the homage of the Netherlands occupied the centre of the other wall. Between the windows stood a black ebony cabinet, inlaid with plates of ivory, on which the figures from Holbein’s Dance of Death had been graved—by the hand, some said, of that famous master himself.
But the little Dwarf cared nothing for all this magnificence.
He would not have given his rose for all the pearls on the canopy, nor one white petal of his rose for the throne itself.
What he wanted was to see the Infanta before she went down to the pavilion, and to ask her to come away with him when he had finished his dance.
Here, in the Palace, the air was close and heavy, but in the forest the wind blew free, and the sunlight with wandering hands of gold moved the tremulous leaves aside.
There were flowers, too, in the forest, not so splendid, perhaps, as the flowers in the garden, but more sweetly scented for all that; hyacinths in early spring that flooded with waving purple the cool glens, and grassy knolls; yellow primroses that nestled in little clumps round the gnarled roots of the oak–trees; bright celandine, and blue speedwell, and irises lilac and gold.
There were grey catkins on the hazels, and the foxgloves drooped with the weight of their dappled bee–haunted cells.
The chestnut had its spires of white stars, and the hawthorn its pallid moons of beauty.
Yes: surely she would come if he could only find her!
She would come with him to the fair forest, and all day long he would dance for her delight.
A smile lit up his eyes at the thought, and he passed into the next room.
Of all the rooms this was the brightest and the most beautiful.
The walls were covered with a pink–flowered Lucca damask, patterned with birds and dotted with dainty blossoms of silver; the furniture was of massive silver, festooned with florid wreaths, and swinging Cupids; in front of the two large fire–places stood great screens broidered with parrots and peacocks, and the floor, which was of sea–green onyx, seemed to stretch far away into the distance.
Nor was he alone.
Standing under the shadow of the doorway, at the extreme end of the room, he saw a little figure watching him.
His heart trembled, a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he moved out into the sunlight.
As he did so, the figure moved out also, and he saw it plainly.
The Infanta!
It was a monster, the most grotesque monster he had ever beheld.
Not properly shaped, as all other people were, but hunchbacked, and crooked–limbed, with huge lolling head and mane of black hair.
The little Dwarf frowned, and the monster frowned also.
He laughed, and it laughed with him, and held its hands to its sides, just as he himself was doing.
He made it a mocking bow, and it returned him a low reverence.
He went towards it, and it came to meet him, copying each step that he made, and stopping when he stopped himself.
He shouted with amusement, and ran forward, and reached out his hand, and the hand of the monster touched his, and it was as cold as ice.
He grew afraid, and moved his hand across, and the monster’s hand followed it quickly.
He tried to press on, but something smooth and hard stopped him.
The face of the monster was now close to his own, and seemed full of terror.
He brushed his hair off his eyes.
It imitated him.
He struck at it, and it returned blow for blow.
He loathed it, and it made hideous faces at him.
He drew back, and it retreated.
What is it?
He thought for a moment, and looked round at the rest of the room.
It was strange, but everything seemed to have its double in this invisible wall of clear water.
Yes, picture for picture was repeated, and couch for couch.
The sleeping Faun that lay in the alcove by the doorway had its twin brother that slumbered, and the silver Venus that stood in the sunlight held out her arms to a Venus as lovely as herself.
Was it Echo?
He had called to her once in the valley, and she had answered him word for word.
Could she mock the eye, as she mocked the voice?
Could she make a mimic world just like the real world?
Could the shadows of things have colour and life and movement?
Could it be that—?
He started, and taking from his breast the beautiful white rose, he turned round, and kissed it.
The monster had a rose of its own, petal for petal the same!
It kissed it with like kisses, and pressed it to its heart with horrible gestures.
When the truth dawned upon him, he gave a wild cry of despair, and fell sobbing to the ground.
So it was he who was misshapen and hunchbacked, foul to look at and grotesque.
He himself was the monster, and it was at him that all the children had been laughing, and the little Princess who he had thought loved him—she too had been merely mocking at his ugliness, and making merry over his twisted limbs.
Why had they not left him in the forest, where there was no mirror to tell him how loathsome he was?
Why had his father not killed him, rather than sell him to his shame?
The hot tears poured down his cheeks, and he tore the white rose to pieces.
The sprawling monster did the same, and scattered the faint petals in the air.
It grovelled on the ground, and, when he looked at it, it watched him with a face drawn with pain.
He crept away, lest he should see it, and covered his eyes with his hands.
He crawled, like some wounded thing, into the shadow, and lay there moaning.
And at that moment the Infanta herself came in with her companions through the open window, and when they saw the ugly little dwarf lying on the ground and beating the floor with his clenched hands, in the most fantastic and exaggerated manner, they went off into shouts of happy laughter, and stood all round him and watched him.
'His dancing was funny,' said the Infanta; 'but his acting is funnier still.
Indeed he is almost as good as the puppets, only of course not quite so natural.'
And she fluttered her big fan, and applauded.
But the little Dwarf never looked up, and his sobs grew fainter and fainter, and suddenly he gave a curious gasp, and clutched his side.
And then he fell back again, and lay quite still.
'That is capital,' said the Infanta, after a pause; 'but now you must dance for me.'
'Yes,' cried all the children, 'you must get up and dance, for you are as clever as the Barbary apes, and much more ridiculous.' But the little Dwarf made no answer.
And the Infanta stamped her foot, and called out to her uncle, who was walking on the terrace with the Chamberlain, reading some despatches that had just arrived from Mexico, where the Holy Office had recently been established.
'My funny little dwarf is sulking,' she cried, 'you must wake him up, and tell him to dance for me.'
They smiled at each other, and sauntered in, and Don Pedro stooped down, and slapped the Dwarf on the cheek with his embroidered glove.
'You must dance,' he said, 'petit monsire.
You must dance. The Infanta of Spain and the Indies wishes to be amused.'
But the little Dwarf never moved.
'A whipping master should be sent for,' said Don Pedro wearily, and he went back to the terrace.
But the Chamberlain looked grave, and he knelt beside the little dwarf, and put his hand upon his heart.
And after a few moments he shrugged his shoulders, and rose up, and having made a low bow to the Infanta, he said – 'Mi bella Princesa, your funny little dwarf will never dance again.
It is a pity, for he is so ugly that he might have made the King smile.'
'But why will he not dance again?' asked the Infanta, laughing.
'Because his heart is broken,' answered the Chamberlain.
And the Infanta frowned, and her dainty rose–leaf lips curled in pretty disdain.
'For the future let those who come to play with me have no hearts,' she cried, and she ran out into the garden.

THE FISHERMAN AND HIS SOUL
[TO H.S.H. ALICE, PRINCESS OF MONACO]
Every evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and threw his nets into the water.
When the wind blew from the land he caught nothing, or but little at best, for it was a bitter and black–winged wind, and rough waves rose up to meet it. But when the wind blew to the shore, the fish came in from the deep, and swam into the meshes of his nets, and he took them to the market–place and sold them. Every evening he went out upon the sea, and one evening the net was so heavy that hardly could he draw it into the boat. And he laughed, and said to himself, 'Surely I have caught all the fish that swim, or snared some dull monster that will be a marvel to men, or some thing of horror that the great Queen will desire,' and putting forth all his strength, he tugged at the coarse ropes till, like lines of blue enamel round a vase of bronze, the long veins rose up on his arms. He tugged at the thin ropes, and nearer and nearer came the circle of flat corks, and the net rose at last to the top of the water.
But no fish at all was in it, nor any monster or thing of horror, but only a little Mermaid lying fast asleep.
Her hair was as a wet fleece of gold, and each separate hair as a thread of fine gold in a cup of glass. Her body was as white ivory, and her tail was of silver and pearl. Silver and pearl was her tail, and the green weeds of the sea coiled round it; and like sea–shells were her ears, and her lips were like sea–coral. The cold waves dashed over her cold breasts, and the salt glistened upon her eyelids.
So beautiful was she that when the young Fisherman saw her he was filled with wonder, and he put out his hand and drew the net close to him, and leaning over the side he clasped her in his arms. And when he touched her, she gave a cry like a startled sea–gull, and woke, and looked at him in terror with her mauve–amethyst eyes, and struggled that she might escape. But he held her tightly to him, and would not suffer her to depart.
And when she saw that she could in no way escape from him, she began to weep, and said, 'I pray thee let me go, for I am the only daughter of a King, and my father is aged and alone.' But the young Fisherman answered, 'I will not let thee go save thou makest me a promise that whenever I call thee, thou wilt come and sing to me, for the fish delight to listen to the song of the Sea–folk, and so shall my nets be full.'
'Wilt thou in very truth let me go, if I promise thee this?' cried the Mermaid.
'In very truth I will let thee go,' said the young Fisherman.
So she made him the promise he desired, and sware it by the oath of the Sea–folk. And he loosened his arms from about her, and she sank down into the water, trembling with a strange fear.
Every evening the young Fisherman went out upon the sea, and called to the Mermaid, and she rose out of the water and sang to him. Round and round her swam the dolphins, and the wild gulls wheeled above her head.
And she sang a marvellous song. For she sang of the Sea–folk who drive their flocks from cave to cave, and carry the little calves on their shoulders; of the Tritons who have long green beards, and hairy breasts, and blow through twisted conchs when the King passes by; of the palace of the King which is all of amber, with a roof of clear emerald, and a pavement of bright pearl; and of the gardens of the sea where the great filigrane fans of coral wave all day long, and the fish dart about like silver birds, and the anemones cling to the rocks, and the pinks bourgeon in the ribbed yellow sand. She sang of the big whales that come down from the north seas and have sharp icicles hanging to their fins; of the Sirens who tell of such wonderful things that the merchants have to stop their ears with wax lest they should hear them, and leap into the water and be drowned; of the sunken galleys with their tall masts, and the frozen sailors clinging to the rigging, and the mackerel swimming in and out of the open portholes; of the little barnacles who are great travellers, and cling to the keels of the ships and go round and round the world; and of the cuttlefish who live in the sides of the cliffs and stretch out their long black arms, and can make night come when they will it. She sang of the nautilus who has a boat of her own that is carved out of an opal and steered with a silken sail; of the happy Mermen who play upon harps and can charm the great Kraken to sleep; of the little children who catch hold of the slippery porpoises and ride laughing upon their backs; of the Mermaids who lie in the white foam and hold out their arms to the mariners; and of the sea–lions with their curved tusks, and the sea–horses with their floating manes.
And as she sang, all the tunny–fish came in from the deep to listen to her, and the young Fisherman threw his nets round them and caught them, and others he took with a spear. And when his boat was well–laden, the Mermaid would sink down into the sea, smiling at him.
Yet would she never come near him that he might touch her. Oftentimes he called to her and prayed of her, but she would not; and when he sought to seize her she dived into the water as a seal might dive, nor did he see her again that day. And each day the sound of her voice became sweeter to his ears. So sweet was her voice that he forgot his nets and his cunning, and had no care of his craft. Vermilion–finned and with eyes of bossy gold, the tunnies went by in shoals, but he heeded them not. His spear lay by his side unused, and his baskets of plaited osier were empty. With lips parted, and eyes dim with wonder, he sat idle in his boat and listened, listening till the sea–mists crept round him, and the wandering moon stained his brown limbs with silver.
And one evening he called to her, and said: 'Little Mermaid, little Mermaid, I love thee. Take me for thy bridegroom, for I love thee.' But the Mermaid shook her head. 'Thou hast a human soul,' she answered. 'If only thou wouldst send away thy soul, then could I love thee.' And the young Fisherman said to himself, 'Of what use is my soul to me? I cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it. Surely I will send it away from me, and much gladness shall be mine.' And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and standing up in the painted boat, he held out his arms to the Mermaid. 'I will send my soul away,' he cried, 'and you shall be my bride, and I will be thy bridegroom, and in the depth of the sea we will dwell together, and all that thou hast sung of thou shalt show me, and all that thou desirest I will do, nor shall our lives be divided.'
And the little Mermaid laughed for pleasure and hid her face in her hands.
'But how shall I send my soul from me?' cried the young Fisherman. 'Tell me how I may do it, and lo! it shall be done.'
'Alas! I know not,' said the little Mermaid: 'the Sea–folk have no souls.' And she sank down into the deep, looking wistfully at him.
Now early on the next morning, before the sun was the span of a man’s hand above the hill, the young Fisherman went to the house of the Priest and knocked three times at the door.
The novice looked out through the wicket, and when he saw who it was, he drew back the latch and said to him, 'Enter.'
And the young Fisherman passed in, and knelt down on the sweet–smelling rushes of the floor, and cried to the Priest who was reading out of the Holy Book and said to him, 'Father, I am in love with one of the Sea–folk, and my soul hindereth me from having my desire. Tell me how I can send my soul away from me, for in truth I have no need of it. Of what value is my soul to me? I cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it.'
And the Priest beat his breast, and answered, 'Alack, alack, thou art mad, or hast eaten of some poisonous herb, for the soul is the noblest part of man, and was given to us by God that we should nobly use it. There is no thing more precious than a human soul, nor any earthly thing that can be weighed with it. It is worth all the gold that is in the world, and is more precious than the rubies of the kings. Therefore, my son, think not any more of this matter, for it is a sin that may not be forgiven. And as for the Sea–folk, they are lost, and they who would traffic with them are lost also. They are as the beasts of the field that know not good from evil, and for them the Lord has not died.'
The young Fisherman’s eyes filled with tears when he heard the bitter words of the Priest, and he rose up from his knees and said to him, 'Father, the Fauns live in the forest and are glad, and on the rocks sit the Mermen with their harps of red gold. Let me be as they are, I beseech thee, for their days are as the days of flowers. And as for my soul, what doth my soul profit me, if it stand between me and the thing that I love?'
'The love of the body is vile,' cried the Priest, knitting his brows, 'and vile and evil are the pagan things God suffers to wander through His world. Accursed be the Fauns of the woodland, and accursed be the singers of the sea! I have heard them at night–time, and they have sought to lure me from my beads. They tap at the window, and laugh. They whisper into my ears the tale of their perilous joys.
They tempt me with temptations, and when I would pray they make mouths at me. They are lost, I tell thee, they are lost. For them there is no heaven nor hell, and in neither shall they praise God’s name.'
'Father,' cried the young Fisherman, 'thou knowest not what thou sayest. Once in my net I snared the daughter of a King. She is fairer than the morning star, and whiter than the moon. For her body I would give my soul, and for her love I would surrender heaven. Tell me what I ask of thee, and let me go in peace.'
'Away! Away!' cried the Priest: 'thy leman is lost, and thou shalt be lost with her.'
And he gave him no blessing, but drove him from his door.
And the young Fisherman went down into the market–place, and he walked slowly, and with bowed head, as one who is in sorrow.
And when the merchants saw him coming, they began to whisper to each other, and one of them came forth to meet him, and called him by name, and said to him, 'What hast thou to sell?'
'I will sell thee my soul,' he answered. 'I pray thee buy it of me, for I am weary of it. Of what use is my soul to me? I cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it.'
But the merchants mocked at him, and said, 'Of what use is a man’s soul to us?
It is not worth a clipped piece of silver. Sell us thy body for a slave, and we will clothe thee in sea–purple, and put a ring upon thy finger, and make thee the minion of the great Queen. But talk not of the soul, for to us it is nought, nor has it any value for our service.'
And the young Fisherman said to himself: 'How strange a thing this is! The Priest telleth me that the soul is worth all the gold in the world, and the merchants say that it is not worth a clipped piece of silver.' And he passed out of the market–place, and went down to the shore of the sea, and began to ponder on what he should do.
And at noon he remembered how one of his companions, who was a gatherer of samphire, had told him of a certain young Witch who dwelt in a cave at the head of the bay and was very cunning in her witcheries. And he set to and ran, so eager was he to get rid of his soul, and a cloud of dust followed him as he sped round the sand of the shore. By the itching of her palm the young Witch knew his coming, and she laughed and let down her red hair. With her red hair falling around her, she stood at the opening of the cave, and in her hand she had a spray of wild hemlock that was blossoming.
'What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack?' she cried, as he came panting up the steep, and bent down before her. 'Fish for thy net, when the wind is foul? I have a little reed–pipe, and when I blow on it the mullet come sailing into the bay. But it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price. What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack? A storm to wreck the ships, and wash the chests of rich treasure ashore? I have more storms than the wind has, for I serve one who is stronger than the wind, and with a sieve and a pail of water I can send the great galleys to the bottom of the sea. But I
have a price, pretty boy, I have a price. What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack? I know a flower that grows in the valley, none knows it but I. It has purple leaves, and a star in its heart, and its juice is as white as milk. Shouldst thou touch with this flower the hard lips of the Queen, she would follow thee all over the world. Out of the bed of the King she would rise, and over the whole world she would follow thee. And it has a price, pretty boy, it has a price. What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack? I can pound a toad in a mortar, and make broth of it, and stir the broth with a dead man’s hand. Sprinkle it on thine enemy while he sleeps, and he will turn into a black viper, and his own mother will slay him. With a wheel I can draw the Moon from heaven, and in a crystal I can show thee Death. What d’ye lack? What d’ye lack? Tell me thy desire, and I will give it thee, and thou shalt pay me a price, pretty boy, thou shalt pay me a price.'
'My desire is but for a little thing,' said the young Fisherman, 'yet hath the Priest been wroth with me, and driven me forth. It is but for a little thing, and the merchants have mocked at me, and denied me. Therefore am I come to thee, though men call thee evil, and whatever be thy price I shall pay it.'
'What wouldst thou?' asked the Witch, coming near to him.
'I would send my soul away from me,' answered the young Fisherman.
The Witch grew pale, and shuddered, and hid her face in her blue mantle.
'Pretty boy, pretty boy,' she muttered, 'that is a terrible thing to do.'
He tossed his brown curls and laughed. 'My soul is nought to me,' he
answered. 'I cannot see it. I may not touch it. I do not know it.'
'What wilt thou give me if I tell thee?' asked the Witch, looking down at him with her beautiful eyes.
'Five pieces of gold,' he said, 'and my nets, and the wattled house where I live, and the painted boat in which I sail. 
Only tell me how to get rid of my soul, and I will give thee all that I possess.'
She laughed mockingly at him, and struck him with the spray of hemlock. 'I can turn the autumn leaves into gold,' she answered, 'and I can weave the pale moonbeams into silver if I will it. He whom I serve is richer than all the kings of this world, and has their dominions.'
'What then shall I give thee,' he cried, 'if thy price be neither gold nor silver?'
The Witch stroked his hair with her thin white hand. 'Thou must dance with me, pretty boy,' she murmured, and she smiled at him as she spoke.
'Nought but that?' cried the young Fisherman in wonder and he rose to his feet.
'Nought but that,' she answered, and she smiled at him again.
'Then at sunset in some secret place we shall dance together,' he said, 'and after that we have danced thou shalt tell me the thing which I desire to know.'
She shook her head. 
'When the moon is full, when the moon is full,' she muttered.
Then she peered all round, and listened.
A blue bird rose screaming from its nest and circled over the dunes, and three spotted birds rustled through the coarse grey grass and whistled to each other.
There was no other sound save the sound of a wave fretting the smooth pebbles below.
So she reached out her hand, and drew him near to her and put her dry lips close to his ear.
'To–night thou must come to the top of the mountain,' she whispered.
'It is a Sabbath, and He will be there.'
The young Fisherman started and looked at her, and she showed her white teeth and laughed. 'Who is He of whom thou speakest?' he asked.
'It matters not,' she answered. 
'Go thou to–night, and stand under the branches of the hornbeam, and wait for my coming.
If a black dog run towards thee, strike it with a rod of willow, and it will go away.
If an owl speak to thee, make it no answer.
When the moon is full I shall be with thee, and we will dance together on the grass.'
'But wilt thou swear to me to tell me how I may send my soul from me?' he made question.
She moved out into the sunlight, and through her red hair rippled the wind.
'By the hoofs of the goat I swear it,' she made answer.
'Thou art the best of the witches,' cried the young Fisherman, 'and I will surely dance with thee to–night on the top of the mountain.
I would indeed that thou hadst asked of me either gold or silver.
But such as thy price is thou shalt have it, for it is but a little thing.'
And he doffed his cap to her, and bent his head low, and ran back to the town filled with a great joy.
And the Witch watched him as he went, and when he had passed from her sight she entered her cave, and having taken a mirror from a box of carved cedarwood, she set it up on a frame, and burned vervain on lighted charcoal before it, and peered through the coils of the smoke.
And after a time she clenched her hands in anger.
'He should have been mine,' she muttered, 'I am as fair as she is.'
And that evening, when the moon had risen, the young Fisherman climbed up to the top of the mountain, and stood under the branches of the hornbeam.
Like a targe of polished metal the round sea lay at his feet, and the shadows of the fishing–boats moved in the little bay.
A great owl, with yellow sulphurous eyes, called to him by his name, but he made it no answer. A black dog ran towards him and snarled.
He struck it with a rod of willow, and it went away whining.
At midnight the witches came flying through the air like bats.
'Phew!' they cried, as they lit upon the ground, 'there is some one here we know not!' and they sniffed about, and chattered to each other, and made signs. Last of all came the young Witch, with her red hair streaming in the wind.
She wore a dress of gold tissue embroidered with peacocks' eyes, and a little cap of green velvet was on her head.
'Where is he, where is he?' shrieked the witches when they saw her, but she only laughed, and ran to the hornbeam, and taking the Fisherman by the hand she led him out into the moonlight and began to dance.
Round and round they whirled, and the young Witch jumped so high that he could see the scarlet heels of her shoes.
Then right across the dancers came the sound of the galloping of a horse, but no horse was to be seen, and he felt afraid.
'Faster,' cried the Witch, and she threw her arms about his neck, and her breath was hot upon his face.
'Faster, faster!' she cried, and the earth seemed to spin beneath his feet, and his brain grew troubled, and a great terror fell on him, as of some evil thing that was watching him, and at last he became aware that under the shadow of a rock there was a figure that had not been there before.
It was a man dressed in a suit of black velvet, cut in the Spanish fashion.
His face was strangely pale, but his lips were like a proud red flower.
He seemed weary, and was leaning back toying in a listless manner with the pommel of his dagger.
On the grass beside him lay a plumed hat, and a pair of riding–gloves gauntleted with gilt lace, and sewn with seed–pearls wrought into a curious device.
A short cloak lined with sables hang from his shoulder, and his delicate white hands were gemmed with rings.
Heavy eyelids drooped over his eyes.
The young Fisherman watched him, as one snared in a spell.
At last their eyes met, and wherever he danced it seemed to him that the eyes of the man were upon him.
He heard the Witch laugh, and caught her by the waist, and whirled her madly round and round.
Suddenly a dog bayed in the wood, and the dancers stopped, and going up two by two, knelt down, and kissed the man’s hands.
As they did so, a little smile touched his proud lips, as a bird’s wing touches the water and makes it laugh.
But there was disdain in it. He kept looking at the young Fisherman.
'Come! let us worship,' whispered the Witch, and she led him up, and a great desire to do as she besought him seized on him, and he followed her.
But when he came close, and without knowing why he did it, he made on his breast the sign of the Cross, and called upon the holy name.
No sooner had he done so than the witches screamed like hawks and flew away, and the pallid face that had been watching him twitched with a spasm of pain.
The man went over to a little wood, and whistled.
A jennet with silver trappings came running to meet him.
As he leapt upon the saddle he turned round, and looked at the young Fisherman sadly.
And the Witch with the red hair tried to fly away also, but the Fisherman caught her by her wrists, and held her fast.
'Loose me,' she cried, 'and let me go.
For thou hast named what should not be named, and shown the sign that may not be looked at.'
'Nay,' he answered, 'but I will not let thee go till thou hast told me the secret.'
'What secret?' said the Witch, wrestling with him like a wild cat, and biting her foam–flecked lips.
'Thou knowest,' he made answer.
Her grass–green eyes grew dim with tears, and she said to the Fisherman, 'Ask me anything but that!'
He laughed, and held her all the more tightly.
And when she saw that she could not free herself, she whispered to him,
'Surely I am as fair as the daughters of the sea, and as comely as those that dwell in the blue waters,' and she fawned on him and put her face close to his.
But he thrust her back frowning, and said to her, 'If thou keepest not the promise that thou madest to me I will slay thee for a false witch.'
She grew grey as a blossom of the Judas tree, and shuddered.
'Be it so,' she muttered. 'It is thy soul and not mine.
Do with it as thou wilt.'
And she took from her girdle a little knife that had a handle of green viper’s skin, and gave it to him.
'What shall this serve me?' he asked of her, wondering.
She was silent for a few moments, and a look of terror came over her face.
Then she brushed her hair back from her forehead, and smiling strangely she said to him, 'What men call the shadow of the body is not the shadow of the body, but is the body of the soul.
Stand on the sea–shore with thy back to the moon, and cut away from around thy feet thy shadow, which is thy soul’s body, and bid thy soul leave thee, and it will do so.'
The young Fisherman trembled. 'Is this true?' he murmured.
'It is true, and I would that I had not told thee of it,' she cried, and she clung to his knees weeping.
He put her from him and left her in the rank grass, and going to the edge of the mountain he placed the knife in his belt and began to climb down.
And his Soul that was within him called out to him and said, 'Lo! I have dwelt with thee for all these years, and have been thy servant. Send me not away from thee now, for what evil have I done thee?'
And the young Fisherman laughed.
'Thou hast done me no evil, but I have no need of thee,' he answered.
'The world is wide, and there is Heaven also, and Hell, and that dim twilight house that lies between.
Go wherever thou wilt, but trouble me not, for my love is calling to me.'
And his Soul besought him piteously, but he heeded it not, but leapt from crag to crag, being sure–footed as a wild goat, and at last he reached the level ground and the yellow shore of the sea.
Bronze–limbed and well–knit, like a statue wrought by a Grecian, he stood on the sand with his back to the moon, and out of the foam came white arms that beckoned to him, and out of the waves rose dim forms that did him homage.
Before him lay his shadow, which was the body of his soul, and behind him hung the moon in the honey–coloured air.
And his Soul said to him, 'If indeed thou must drive me from thee, send me not forth without a heart.
The world is cruel, give me thy heart to take with me.'
He tossed his head and smiled.
'With what should I love my love if I gave thee my heart?' he cried.
'Nay, but be merciful,' said his Soul: 'give me thy heart, for the world is very cruel, and I am afraid.'
'My heart is my love’s,' he answered, 'therefore tarry not, but get thee gone.'
'Should I not love also?' asked his Soul.
'Get thee gone, for I have no need of thee,' cried the young Fisherman, and he took the little knife with its handle of green viper’s skin, and cut away his shadow from around his feet, and it rose up and stood before him, and looked at him, and it was even as himself.
He crept back, and thrust the knife into his belt, and a feeling of awe came over him.
'Get thee gone,' he murmured, 'and let me see thy face no more.'
'Nay, but we must meet again,' said the Soul.
Its voice was low and flute–like, and its lips hardly moved while it spake.
'How shall we meet?' cried the young Fisherman.
'Thou wilt not follow me into the depths of the sea?'
'Once every year I will come to this place, and call to thee,' said the Soul.
'It may be that thou wilt have need of me.'
'What need should I have of thee?' cried the young Fisherman, 'but be it as thou wilt,' and he plunged into the waters and the Tritons blew their horns and the little Mermaid rose up to meet him, and put her arms around his neck and kissed him on the mouth.
And the Soul stood on the lonely beach and watched them.
And when they had sunk down into the sea, it went weeping away over the marshes.
And after a year was over the Soul came down to the shore of the sea and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep, and said, 'Why dost thou call to me?'
And the Soul answered, 'Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have seen marvellous things.'
So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, 'When I left thee I turned my face to the East and journeyed.
From the East cometh everything that is wise.
Six days I journeyed, and on the morning of the seventh day I came to a hill that is in the country of the Tartars.
I sat down under the shade of a tamarisk tree to shelter myself from the sun.
The land was dry and burnt up with the heat.
The people went to and fro over the plain like flies crawling upon a disk of polished copper.
'When it was noon a cloud of red dust rose up from the flat rim of the land.
When the Tartars saw it, they strung their painted bows, and having leapt upon their little horses they galloped to meet it.
The women fled screaming to the waggons, and hid themselves behind the felt curtains.
'At twilight the Tartars returned, but five of them were missing, and of those that came back not a few had been wounded.
They harnessed their horses to the waggons and drove hastily away.
Three jackals came out of a cave and peered after them.
Then they sniffed up the air with their nostrils, and trotted off in the opposite direction.
'When the moon rose I saw a camp–fire burning on the plain, and went towards it.
A company of merchants were seated round it on carpets.
Their camels were picketed behind them, and the negroes who were their servants were pitching tents of tanned skin upon the sand, and making a high wall of the prickly pear.
'As I came near them, the chief of the merchants rose up and drew his sword, and asked me my business.
'I answered that I was a Prince in my own land, and that I had escaped from the Tartars, who had sought to make me their slave.
The chief smiled, and showed me five heads fixed upon long reeds of bamboo.
'Then he asked me who was the prophet of God, and I answered him Mohammed.
'When he heard the name of the false prophet, he bowed and took me by the hand, and placed me by his side.
A negro brought me some mare’s milk in a wooden dish, and a piece of lamb’s flesh roasted.
'At daybreak we started on our journey.
I rode on a red–haired camel by the side of the chief, and a runner ran before us carrying a spear.
The men of war were on either hand, and the mules followed with the merchandise.
There were forty camels in the caravan, and the mules were twice forty in number.
'We went from the country of the Tartars into the country of those who curse the Moon.
We saw the Gryphons guarding their gold on the white rocks, and the scaled Dragons sleeping in their caves.
As we passed over the mountains we held our breath lest the snows might fall on us, and each man tied a veil of gauze before his eyes.
As we passed through the valleys the Pygmies shot arrows at us from the hollows of the trees, and at night–time we heard the wild men beating on their drums.
When we came to the Tower of Apes we set fruits before them, and they did not harm us.
When we came to the Tower of Serpents we gave them warm milk in howls of brass, and they let us go by.
Three times in our journey we came to the banks of the Oxus.
We crossed it on rafts of wood with great bladders of blown hide.
The river–horses raged against us and sought to slay us.
When the camels saw them they trembled.
'The kings of each city levied tolls on us, but would not suffer us to enter their gates.
They threw us bread over the walls, little maize–cakes baked in honey and cakes of fine flour filled with dates.
For every hundred baskets we gave them a bead of amber.
'When the dwellers in the villages saw us coming, they poisoned the wells and fled to the hill–summits.
We fought with the Magadae who are born old, and grow younger and younger every year, and die when they are little children; and with the Laktroi who say that they are the sons of tigers, and paint themselves yellow and black; and with the Aurantes who bury their dead on the tops of trees, and themselves live in dark caverns lest the Sun, who is their god, should slay them; and with the Krimnians who worship a crocodile, and give it earrings of green glass, and feed it with butter and fresh fowls; and with the Agazonbae, who are dog–faced; and with the Sibans, who have horses' feet, and run more swiftly than horses.
A third of our company died in battle, and a third died of want.
The rest murmured against me, and said that I had brought them an evil fortune.
I took a horned adder from beneath a stone and let it sting me.
When they saw that I did not sicken they grew afraid.
'In the fourth month we reached the city of Illel.
It was night–time when we came to the grove that is outside the walls, and the air was sultry, for the Moon was travelling in Scorpion.
We took the ripe pomegranates from the trees, and brake them, and drank their sweet juices. Then we lay down on our carpets, and waited for the dawn.
'And at dawn we rose and knocked at the gate of the city.
It was wrought out of red bronze, and carved with sea–dragons and dragons that have wings.
The guards looked down from the battlements and asked us our business.
The interpreter of the caravan answered that we had come from the island of Syria with much merchandise.
They took hostages, and told us that they would open the gate to us at noon, and bade us tarry till then.
'When it was noon they opened the gate, and as we entered in the people came crowding out of the houses to look at us, and a crier went round the city crying through a shell.
We stood in the market–place, and the negroes uncorded the bales of figured cloths and opened the carved chests of sycamore.
And when they had ended their task, the merchants set forth their strange wares, the waxed linen from Egypt and the painted linen from the country of the Ethiops, the purple sponges from Tyre and the blue hangings from Sidon, the cups of cold amber and the fine vessels of glass and the curious vessels of burnt clay.
From the roof of a house a company of women watched us.
One of them wore a mask of gilded leather.
'And on the first day the priests came and bartered with us, and on the second day came the nobles, and on the third day came the craftsmen and the slaves.
And this is their custom with all merchants as long as they tarry in the city.
'And we tarried for a moon, and when the moon was waning, I wearied and wandered away through the streets of the city and came to the garden of its god.
The priests in their yellow robes moved silently through the green trees, and on a pavement of black marble stood the rose–red house in which the god had his dwelling.
Its doors were of powdered lacquer, and bulls and peacocks were wrought on them in raised and polished gold.
The tilted roof was of sea–green porcelain, and the jutting eaves were festooned with little bells.
When the white doves flew past, they struck the bells with their wings and made them tinkle.
'In front of the temple was a pool of clear water paved with veined onyx.
I lay down beside it, and with my pale fingers I touched the broad leaves.
One of the priests came towards me and stood behind me. He had sandals on his feet, one of soft serpent–skin and the other of birds' plumage.
On his head was a mitre of black felt decorated with silver crescents.
Seven yellows were woven into his robe, and his frizzed hair was stained with antimony.
'After a little while he spake to me, and asked me my desire.
'I told him that my desire was to see the god.
'"The god is hunting," said the priest, looking strangely at me with his small slanting eyes.
'"Tell me in what forest, and I will ride with him," I answered.
He combed out the soft fringes of his tunic with his long pointed nails. 
“The god is asleep," he murmured.
"Tell me on what couch, and I will watch by him," I answered.
"The god is at the feast," he cried.
"If the wine be sweet I will drink it with him, and if it be bitter I will drink it with him also," was my answer.
'He bowed his head in wonder, and, taking me by the hand, he raised me up, and led me into the temple.
'And in the first chamber I saw an idol seated on a throne of jasper bordered with great orient pearls. 
It was carved out of ebony, and in stature was of the stature of a man.
On its forehead was a ruby, and thick oil dripped from its hair on to its thighs.
Its feet were red with the blood of a newly–slain kid, and its loins girt with a copper belt that was studded with seven beryls.
'And I said to the priest, "Is this the god?" And he answered me, "This is the god."
'"Show me the god," I cried, "or I will surely slay thee."
And I touched his hand, and it became withered.
'And the priest besought me, saying, "Let my lord heal his servant, and I will show him the god."
'So I breathed with my breath upon his hand, and it became whole again, and he trembled and led me into the second chamber, and I saw an idol standing on a lotus of jade hung with great emeralds.
It was carved out of ivory, and in stature was twice the stature of a man.
On its forehead was a chrysolite, and its breasts were smeared with myrrh and cinnamon.
In one hand it held a crooked sceptre of jade, and in the other a round crystal.
It ware buskins of brass, and its thick neck was circled with a circle of selenites.
'And I said to the priest, "Is this the god?"
'And he answered me, "This is the god."
'"Show me the god," I cried, "or I will surely slay thee."
And I touched his eyes, and they became blind.
'And the priest besought me, saying, "Let my lord heal his servant, and I will show him the god."
'So I breathed with my breath upon his eyes, and the sight came back to them, and he trembled again, and led me into the third chamber, and lo! there was no idol in it, nor image of any kind, but only a mirror of round metal set on an altar of stone.
'And I said to the priest, "Where is the god?"
'And he answered me: "There is no god but this mirror that thou seest, for this is the Mirror of Wisdom. 
And it reflecteth all things that are in heaven and on earth, save only the face of him who looketh into it.
This it reflecteth not, so that he who looketh into it may be wise.
Many other mirrors are there, but they are mirrors of Opinion.
This only is the Mirror of Wisdom.
And they who possess this mirror know everything, nor is there anything hidden from them.
And they who possess it not have not Wisdom.
Therefore is it the god, and we worship it."
And I looked into the mirror, and it was even as he had said to me.
'And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a valley that is but a day’s journey from this place have I hidden the Mirror of Wisdom.
Do but suffer me to enter into thee again and be thy servant, and thou shalt be wiser than all the wise men, and Wisdom shall be thine.
Suffer me to enter into thee, and none will be as wise as thou.'
But the young Fisherman laughed.
'Love is better than Wisdom,' he cried, 'and the little Mermaid loves me.'
'Nay, but there is nothing better than Wisdom,' said the Soul.
'Love is better,' answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the deep, and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the second year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and said, 'Why dost thou call to me?'
And the Soul answered, 'Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have seen marvellous things.'
So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, 'When I left thee, I turned my face to the South and journeyed.
From the South cometh everything that is precious.
Six days I journeyed along the highways that lead to the city of Ashter, along the dusty red–dyed highways by which the pilgrims are wont to go did I journey, and on the morning of the seventh day I lifted up my eyes, and lo! the city lay at my feet, for it is in a valley.
'There are nine gates to this city, and in front of each gate stands a bronze horse that neighs when the Bedouins come down from the mountains.
The walls are cased with copper, and the watch–towers on the walls are roofed with brass.
In every tower stands an archer with a bow in his hand.
At sunrise he strikes with an arrow on a gong, and at sunset he blows through a horn of horn.
'When I sought to enter, the guards stopped me and asked of me who I was.
I made answer that I was a Dervish and on my way to the city of Mecca, where there was a green veil on which the Koran was embroidered in silver letters by the hands of the angels. They were filled with wonder, and entreated me to pass in.
'Inside it is even as a bazaar.
Surely thou shouldst have been with me.
Across the narrow streets the gay lanterns of paper flutter like large butterflies.
When the wind blows over the roofs they rise and fall as painted bubbles do.
In front of their booths sit the merchants on silken carpets.
They have straight black beards, and their turbans are covered with golden sequins, and long strings of amber and carved peach–stones glide through their cool fingers.
Some of them sell galbanum and nard, and curious perfumes from the islands of the Indian Sea, and the thick oil of red roses, and myrrh and little nail–shaped cloves.
When one stops to speak to them, they throw pinches of frankincense upon a charcoal brazier and make the air sweet.
I saw a Syrian who held in his hands a thin rod like a reed.
Grey threads of smoke came from it, and its odour as it burned was as the odour of the pink almond in spring.
Others sell silver bracelets embossed all over with creamy blue turquoise stones, and anklets of brass wire fringed with little pearls, and tigers' claws set in gold, and the claws of that gilt cat, the leopard, set in gold also, and earrings of pierced emerald, and finger–rings of hollowed jade.
From the tea–houses comes the sound of the guitar, and the opium–smokers with their white smiling faces look out at the passers–by.
'Of a truth thou shouldst have been with me.
The wine–sellers elbow their way through the crowd with great black skins on their shoulders.
Most of them sell the wine of Schiraz, which is as sweet as honey.
They serve it in little metal cups and strew rose leaves upon it.
In the market–place stand the fruitsellers, who sell all kinds of fruit: ripe figs, with their bruised purple flesh, melons, smelling of musk and yellow as topazes, citrons and rose–apples and clusters of white grapes, round red–gold oranges, and oval lemons of green gold.
Once I saw an elephant go by. Its trunk was painted with vermilion and turmeric, and over its ears it had a net of crimson silk cord.
It stopped opposite one of the booths and began eating the oranges, and the man only laughed. Thou canst not think how strange a people they are.
When they are glad they go to the bird–sellers and buy of them a caged bird, and set it free that their joy may be greater, and when they are sad they scourge themselves with thorns that their sorrow may not grow less.
'One evening I met some negroes carrying a heavy palanquin through the bazaar.
It was made of gilded bamboo, and the poles were of vermilion lacquer studded with brass peacocks.
Across the windows hung thin curtains of muslin embroidered with beetles' wings and with tiny seed–pearls, and as it passed by a pale–faced Circassian looked out and smiled at me.
I followed behind, and the negroes hurried their steps and scowled.
But I did not care.
I felt a great curiosity come over me.
'At last they stopped at a square white house.
There were no windows to it, only a little door like the door of a tomb.
They set down the palanquin and knocked three times with a copper hammer.
An Armenian in a caftan of green leather peered through the wicket, and when he saw them he opened, and spread a carpet on the ground, and the woman stepped out.
As she went in, she turned round and smiled at me again. 
I had never seen any one so pale.
'When the moon rose I returned to the same place and sought for the house, but it was no longer there.
When I saw that, I knew who the woman was, and wherefore she had smiled at me.
'Certainly thou shouldst have been with me.
On the feast of the New Moon the young Emperor came forth from his palace and went into the mosque to pray.
His hair and beard were dyed with rose–leaves, and his cheeks were powdered with a fine gold dust.
The palms of his feet and hands were yellow with saffron.
'At sunrise he went forth from his palace in a robe of silver, and at sunset he returned to it again in a robe of gold.
The people flung themselves on the ground and hid their faces, but I would not do so.
I stood by the stall of a seller of dates and waited.
When the Emperor saw me, he raised his painted eyebrows and stopped.
I stood quite still, and made him no obeisance.
The people marvelled at my boldness, and counselled me to flee from the city.
I paid no heed to them, but went and sat with the sellers of strange gods, who by reason of their craft are abominated.
When I told them what I had done, each of them gave me a god and prayed me to leave them.
'That night, as I lay on a cushion in the tea–house that is in the Street of Pomegranates, the guards of the Emperor entered and led me to the palace.
As I went in they closed each door behind me, and put a chain across it.
Inside was a great court with an arcade running all round.
The walls were of white alabaster, set here and there with blue and green tiles.
The pillars were of green marble, and the pavement of a kind of peach–blossom marble.
I had never seen anything like it before.
'As I passed across the court two veiled women looked down from a balcony and cursed me. The guards hastened on, and the butts of the lances rang upon the polished floor.
They opened a gate of wrought ivory, and I found myself in a watered garden of seven terraces. It was planted with tulip–cups and moonflowers, and silver–studded aloes.
Like a slim reed of crystal a fountain hung in the dusky air.
The cypress–trees were like burnt–out torches.
From one of them a nightingale was singing.
'At the end of the garden stood a little pavilion.
As we approached it two eunuchs came out to meet us.
Their fat bodies swayed as they walked, and they glanced curiously at me with their yellow–lidded eyes.
One of them drew aside the captain of the guard, and in a low voice whispered to him.
The other kept munching scented pastilles, which he took with an affected gesture out of an oval box of lilac enamel.
'After a few moments the captain of the guard dismissed the soldiers.
They went back to the palace, the eunuchs following slowly behind and plucking the sweet mulberries from the trees as they passed.
Once the elder of the two turned round, and smiled at me with an evil smile.
'Then the captain of the guard motioned me towards the entrance of the pavilion.
I walked on without trembling, and drawing the heavy curtain aside I entered in.
'The young Emperor was stretched on a couch of dyed lion skins, and a gerfalcon perched upon his wrist.
Behind him stood a brass–turbaned Nubian, naked down to the waist, and with heavy earrings in his split ears.
On a table by the side of the couch lay a mighty scimitar of steel.
'When the Emperor saw me he frowned, and said to me, "What is thy name?
Knowest thou not that I am Emperor of this city?" But I made him no answer.
'He pointed with his finger at the scimitar, and the Nubian seized it, and rushing forward struck at me with great violence.
The blade whizzed through me, and did me no hurt.
The man fell sprawling on the floor, and when he rose up his teeth chattered with terror and he hid himself behind the couch.
'The Emperor leapt to his feet, and taking a lance from a stand of arms, he threw it at me.
I caught it in its flight, and brake the shaft into two pieces.
He shot at me with an arrow, but I held up my hands and it stopped in mid–air.
Then he drew a dagger from a belt of white leather, and stabbed the Nubian in the throat lest the slave should tell of his dishonour.
The man writhed like a trampled snake, and a red foam bubbled from his lips.
'As soon as he was dead the Emperor turned to me, and when he had wiped away the bright sweat from his brow with a little napkin of purfled and purple silk, he said to me, "Art thou a prophet, that I may not harm thee, or the son of a prophet, that I can do thee no hurt?
I pray thee leave my city to–night, for while thou art in it I am no longer its lord."
'And I answered him, "I will go for half of thy treasure.
Give me half of thy treasure, and I will go away."
'He took me by the hand, and led me out into the garden.
When the captain of the guard saw me, he wondered.
When the eunuchs saw me, their knees shook and they fell upon the ground in fear.
'There is a chamber in the palace that has eight walls of red porphyry, and a brass–sealed ceiling hung with lamps.
The Emperor touched one of the walls and it opened, and we passed down a corridor that was lit with many torches.
In niches upon each side stood great wine–jars filled to the brim with silver pieces.
When we reached the centre of the corridor the Emperor spake the word that may not be spoken, and a granite door swung back on a secret spring, and he put his hands before his face lest his eyes should be dazzled.
'Thou couldst not believe how marvellous a place it was.
There were huge tortoise–shells full of pearls, and hollowed moonstones of great size piled up with red rubies.
The gold was stored in coffers of elephant–hide, and the gold–dust in leather bottles.
There were opals and sapphires, the former in cups of crystal, and the latter in cups of jade.
Round green emeralds were ranged in order upon thin plates of ivory, and in one corner were silk bags filled, some with turquoise–stones, and others with beryls.
The ivory horns were heaped with purple amethysts, and the horns of brass with chalcedonies and sards.
The pillars, which were of cedar, were hung with strings of yellow lynx–stones.
In the flat oval shields there were carbuncles, both wine–coloured and coloured like grass.
And yet I have told thee but a tithe of what was there.
'And when the Emperor had taken away his hands from before his face he said to me: "This is my house of treasure, and half that is in it is thine, even as I promised to thee.
And I will give thee camels and camel drivers, and they shall do thy bidding and take thy share of the treasure to whatever part of the world thou desirest to go.
And the thing shall be done to–night, for I would not that the Sun, who is my father, should see that there is in my city a man whom I cannot slay."
'But I answered him, "The gold that is here is thine, and the silver also is thine, and thine are the precious jewels and the things of price.
As for me, I have no need of these.
Nor shall I take aught from thee but that little ring that thou wearest on the finger of thy hand."
'And the Emperor frowned.
"It is but a ring of lead," he cried, "nor has it any value.
Therefore take thy half of the treasure and go from my city."
'"Nay," I answered, "but I will take nought but that leaden ring, for I know what is written within it, and for what purpose."
'And the Emperor trembled, and besought me and said, "Take all the treasure and go from my city.
The half that is mine shall be thine also."
'And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a cave that is but a day’s journey from this place have, I hidden the Ring of Riches.
It is but a day’s journey from this place, and it waits for thy coming.
He who has this Ring is richer than all the kings of the world.
Come therefore and take it, and the world’s riches shall be thine.'
But the young Fisherman laughed.
'Love is better than Riches,' he cried, 'and the little Mermaid loves me.'
'Nay, but there is nothing better than Riches,' said the Soul.
'Love is better,' answered the young Fisherman, and he plunged into the deep, and the Soul went weeping away over the marshes.
And after the third year was over, the Soul came down to the shore of the sea, and called to the young Fisherman, and he rose out of the deep and said, 'Why dost thou call to me?'
And the Soul answered, 'Come nearer, that I may speak with thee, for I have seen marvellous things.'
So he came nearer, and couched in the shallow water, and leaned his head upon his hand and listened.
And the Soul said to him, 'In a city that I know of there is an inn that standeth by a river.
I sat there with sailors who drank of two different–coloured wines, and ate bread made of barley, and little salt fish served in bay leaves with vinegar.
And as we sat and made merry, there entered to us an old man bearing a leathern carpet and a lute that had two horns of amber.
And when he had laid out the carpet on the floor, he struck with a quill on the wire strings of his lute, and a girl whose face was veiled ran in and began to dance before us.
Her face was veiled with a veil of gauze, but her feet were naked.
Naked were her feet, and they moved over the carpet like little white pigeons.
Never have I seen anything so marvellous; and the city in which she dances is but a day’s journey from this place.'
Now when the young Fisherman heard the words of his Soul, he remembered that the little Mermaid had no feet and could not dance.
And a great desire came over him, and he said to himself, 'It is but a day’s journey, and I can return to my love,' and he laughed, and stood up in the shallow water, and strode towards the shore.
And when he had reached the dry shore he laughed again, and held out his arms to his Soul.
And his Soul gave a great cry of joy and ran to meet him, and entered into him, and the young Fisherman saw stretched before him upon the sand that shadow of the body that is the body of the Soul.
And his Soul said to him, 'Let us not tarry, but get hence at once, for the Sea–gods are jealous, and have monsters that do their bidding.'
So they made haste, and all that night they journeyed beneath the moon, and all the next day they journeyed beneath the sun, and on the evening of the day they came to a city.
And the young Fisherman said to his Soul, 'Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou didst speak to me?'
And his Soul answered him, 'It is not this city, but another.
Nevertheless let us enter in.'
So they entered in and passed through the streets, and as they passed through the Street of the Jewellers the young Fisherman saw a fair silver cup set forth in a booth.
And his Soul said to him, 'Take that silver cup and hide it.'
So he took the cup and hid it in the fold of his tunic, and they went hurriedly out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman frowned, and flung the cup away, and said to his Soul, 'Why didst thou tell me to take this cup and hide it, for it was an evil thing to do?'
But his Soul answered him, 'Be at peace, be at peace.'
And on the evening of the second day they came to a city, and the young Fisherman said to his Soul, 'Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou didst speak to me?'
And his Soul answered him, 'It is not this city, but another.
Nevertheless let us enter in.'
So they entered in and passed through the streets, and as they passed through the Street of the Sellers of Sandals, the young Fisherman saw a child standing by a jar of water.
And his Soul said to him, 'Smite that child.' So he smote the child till it wept, and when he had done this they went hurriedly out of the city.
And after that they had gone a league from the city the young Fisherman grew wroth, and said to his Soul, 'Why didst thou tell me to smite the child, for it was an evil thing to do?'
But his Soul answered him, 'Be at peace, be at peace.'
And on the evening of the third day they came to a city, and the young Fisherman said to his Soul, 'Is this the city in which she dances of whom thou didst speak to me?'
And his Soul answered him, 'It may be that it is in this city, therefore let us enter in.'
So they entered in and passed through the streets, but nowhere could the young Fisherman find the river or the inn that stood by its side.
And the people of the city looked curiously at him, and he grew afraid and said to his Soul, 'Let us go hence, for she who dances with white feet is not here.'
But his Soul answered, 'Nay, but let us tarry, for the night is dark and there will be robbers on the way.'
So he sat him down in the market–place and rested, and after a time there went by a hooded merchant who had a cloak of cloth of Tartary, and bare a lantern of pierced horn at the end of a jointed reed.
And the merchant said to him, 'Why dost thou sit in the market–place, seeing that the booths are closed and the bales corded?'
And the young Fisherman answered him, 'I can find no inn in this city, nor have I any kinsman who might give me shelter.'
'Are we not all kinsmen?' said the merchant.
'And did not one God make us?
Therefore come with me, for I have a guest–chamber.'
So the young Fisherman rose up and followed the merchant to his house.
And when he had passed through a garden of pomegranates and entered into the house, the merchant brought him rose–water in a copper dish that he might wash his hands, and ripe melons that he might quench his thirst, and set a bowl of rice and a piece of roasted kid before him.
And after that he had finished, the merchant led him to the guest–chamber, and bade him sleep and be at rest.
And the young Fisherman gave him thanks, and kissed the ring that was on his hand, and flung himself down on the carpets of dyed goat’s–hair.
And when he had covered himself with a covering of black lamb’s–wool he fell asleep.
And three hours before dawn, and while it was still night, his Soul waked him and said to him, 'Rise up and go to the room of the merchant, even to the room in which he sleepeth, and slay him, and take from him his gold, for we have need of it.'
And the young Fisherman rose up and crept towards the room of the merchant, and over the feet of the merchant there was lying a curved sword, and the tray by the side of the merchant held nine purses of gold.
And he reached out his hand and touched the sword, and when he touched it the merchant started and awoke, and leaping up seized himself the sword and cried to the young Fisherman, 'Dost thou return evil for good, and pay with the shedding of blood for the kindness that I have shown thee?'
And his Soul said to the young Fisherman, 'Strike him,' and he struck him so that he swooned and he seized then the nine purses of gold, and fled hastily through the garden of pomegranates, and set his face to the star that is the star of morning.
And when they had gone a league from the city, the young Fisherman beat his breast, and said to his Soul, 'Why didst thou bid me slay the merchant and take his gold? Surely thou art evil.'
But his Soul answered him, 'Be at peace, be at peace.'
'Nay,' cried the young Fisherman, 'I may not be at peace, for all that thou hast made me to do I hate.
Thee also I hate, and I bid thee tell me wherefore thou hast wrought with me in this wise.'
And his Soul answered him, 'When thou didst send me forth into the world thou gavest me no heart, so I learned to do all these things and love them.'
'What sayest thou?' murmured the young Fisherman.
'Thou knowest,' answered his Soul, 'thou knowest it well.
Hast thou forgotten that thou gavest me no heart?
I trow not.
And so trouble not thyself nor me, but be at peace, for there is no pain that thou shalt not give away, nor any pleasure that thou shalt not receive.'
And when the young Fisherman heard these words he trembled and said to his Soul, 'Nay, but thou art evil, and hast made me forget my love, and hast tempted me with temptations, and hast set my feet in the ways of sin.'
And his Soul answered him, 'Thou hast not forgotten that when thou didst send me forth into the world thou gavest me no heart.
Come, let us go to another city, and make merry, for we have nine purses of gold.'
But the young Fisherman took the nine purses of gold, and flung them down, and trampled on them.
'Nay,' he cried, 'but I will have nought to do with thee, nor will I journey with thee anywhere, but even as I sent thee away before, so will I send thee away now, for thou hast wrought me no good.'
And he turned his back to the moon, and with the little knife that had the handle of green viper’s skin he strove to cut from his feet that shadow of the body which is the body of the Soul.
Yet his Soul stirred not from him, nor paid heed to his command, but said to him, 'The spell that the Witch told thee avails thee no more, for I may not leave thee, nor mayest thou drive me forth.
Once in his life may a man send his Soul away, but he who receiveth back his Soul must keep it with him for ever, and this is his punishment and his reward.'
And the young Fisherman grew pale and clenched his hands and cried, 'She was a false Witch in that she told me not that.'
'Nay,' answered his Soul, 'but she was true to Him she worships, and whose servant she will be ever.'
And when the young Fisherman knew that he could no longer get rid of his Soul, and that it was an evil Soul and would abide with him always, he fell upon the ground weeping bitterly.
And when it was day the young Fisherman rose up and said to his Soul, 'I will bind my hands that I may not do thy bidding, and close my lips that I may not speak thy words, and I will return to the place where she whom I love has her dwelling.
Even to the sea will I return, and to the little bay where she is wont to sing, and I will call to her and tell her the evil I have done and the evil thou hast wrought on me.'
And his Soul tempted him and said, 'Who is thy love, that thou shouldst return to her?
The world has many fairer than she is.
There are the dancing–girls of Samaris who dance in the manner of all kinds of birds and beasts.
Their feet are painted with henna, and in their hands they have little copper bells.
They laugh while they dance, and their laughter is as clear as the laughter of water.
Come with me and I will show them to thee.
For what is this trouble of thine about the things of sin?
Is that which is pleasant to eat not made for the eater?
Is there poison in that which is sweet to drink?
Trouble not thyself, but come with me to another city.
There is a little city hard by in which there is a garden of tulip–trees.
And there dwell in this comely garden white peacocks and peacocks that have blue breasts.
Their tails when they spread them to the sun are like disks of ivory and like gilt disks.
And she who feeds them dances for their pleasure, and sometimes she dances on her hands and at other times she dances with her feet.
Her eyes are coloured with stibium, and her nostrils are shaped like the wings of a swallow. From a hook in one of her nostrils hangs a flower that is carved out of a pearl.
She laughs while she dances, and the silver rings that are about her ankles tinkle like bells of silver.
And so trouble not thyself any more, but come with me to this city.'
But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but closed his lips with the seal of silence and with a tight cord bound his hands, and journeyed back to the place from which he had come, even to the little bay where his love had been wont to sing. And ever did his Soul tempt him by the way, but he made it no answer, nor would he do any of the wickedness that it sought to make him to do, so great was the power of the love that was within him.
And when he had reached the shore of the sea, he loosed the cord from his hands, and took the seal of silence from his lips, and called to the little Mermaid.
But she came not to his call, though he called to her all day long and besought her.
And his Soul mocked him and said, 'Surely thou hast but little joy out of thy love.
Thou art as one who in time of death pours water into a broken vessel.
Thou givest away what thou hast, and nought is given to thee in return.
It were better for thee to come with me, for I know where the Valley of Pleasure lies, and what things are wrought there.'
But the young Fisherman answered not his Soul, but in a cleft of the rock he built himself a house of wattles, and abode there for the space of a year.
And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he called to her again, and at night–time he spake her name.
Yet never did she rise out of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he find her though he sought for her in the caves and in the green water, in the pools of the tide and in the wells that are at the bottom of the deep.
And ever did his Soul tempt him with evil, and whisper of terrible things.
Yet did it not prevail against him, so great was the power of his love.
And after the year was over, the Soul thought within himself, 'I have tempted my master with evil, and his love is stronger than I am.
I will tempt him now with good, and it may be that he will come with me.'
So he spake to the young Fisherman and said, 'I have told thee of the joy of the world, and thou hast turned a deaf ear to me.
Suffer me now to tell thee of the world’s pain, and it may be that thou wilt hearken.
For of a truth pain is the Lord of this world, nor is there any one who escapes from its net.
There be some who lack raiment, and others who lack bread.
There be widows who sit in purple, and widows who sit in rags.
To and fro over the fens go the lepers, and they are cruel to each other.
The beggars go up and down on the highways, and their wallets are empty.
Through the streets of the cities walks Famine, and the Plague sits at their gates.
Come, let us go forth and mend these things, and make them not to be.
Wherefore shouldst thou tarry here calling to thy love, seeing she comes not to thy call?
And what is love, that thou shouldst set this high store upon it?'
But the young Fisherman answered it nought, so great was the power of his love.
And every morning he called to the Mermaid, and every noon he called to her again, and at night–time he spake her name.
Yet never did she rise out of the sea to meet him, nor in any place of the sea could he find her, though he sought for her in the rivers of the sea, and in the valleys that are under the waves, in the sea that the night makes purple, and in the sea that the dawn leaves grey.
And after the second year was over, the Soul said to the young Fisherman at night–time, and as he sat in the wattled house alone, 'Lo! now I have tempted thee with evil, and I have tempted thee with good, and thy love is stronger than I am.
Wherefore will I tempt thee no longer, but I pray thee to suffer me to enter thy heart, that I may be one with thee even as before.'
'Surely thou mayest enter,' said the young Fisherman, 'for in the days when with no heart thou didst go through the world thou must have much suffered.'
'Alas!' cried his Soul, 'I can find no place of entrance, so compassed about with love is this heart of thine.'
'Yet I would that I could help thee,' said the young Fisherman.
And as he spake there came a great cry of mourning from the sea, even the cry that men hear when one of the Sea–folk is dead.
And the young Fisherman leapt up, and left his wattled house, and ran down to the shore. And the black waves came hurrying to the shore, bearing with them a burden that was whiter than silver.
White as the surf it was, and like a flower it tossed on the waves.
And the surf took it from the waves, and the foam took it from the surf, and the shore received it, and lying at his feet the young Fisherman saw the body of the little Mermaid.
Dead at his feet it was lying.
Weeping as one smitten with pain he flung himself down beside it, and he kissed the cold red of the mouth, and toyed with the wet amber of the hair.
He flung himself down beside it on the sand, weeping as one trembling with joy, and in his brown arms he held it to his breast.
Cold were the lips, yet he kissed them.
Salt was the honey of the hair, yet he tasted it with a bitter joy.
He kissed the closed eyelids, and the wild spray that lay upon their cups was less salt than
his tears.
And to the dead thing he made confession.
Into the shells of its ears he poured the harsh wine of his tale.
He put the little hands round his neck, and with his fingers he touched the thin reed of the throat. Bitter, bitter was his joy, and full of strange gladness was his pain.
The black sea came nearer, and the white foam moaned like a leper.
With white claws of foam the sea grabbled at the shore.
From the palace of the Sea–King came the cry of mourning again, and far out upon the sea the great Tritons blew hoarsely upon their horns.
'Flee away,' said his Soul, 'for ever doth the sea come nigher, and if thou tarriest it will slay thee.
Flee away, for I am afraid, seeing that thy heart is closed against me by reason of the greatness of thy love.
Flee away to a place of safety.
Surely thou wilt not send me without a heart into another world?'
But the young Fisherman listened not to his Soul, but called on the little Mermaid and said, 'Love is better than wisdom, and more precious than riches, and fairer than the feet of the daughters of men.
The fires cannot destroy it, nor can the waters quench it.
I called on thee at dawn, and thou didst not come to my call.
The moon heard thy name, yet hadst thou no heed of me.
For evilly had I left thee, and to my own hurt had I wandered away.
Yet ever did thy love abide with me, and ever was it strong, nor did aught prevail against it, though I have looked upon evil and looked upon good.
And now that thou art dead, surely I will die with thee also.'
And his Soul besought him to depart, but he would not, so great was his love.
And the sea came nearer, and sought to cover him with its waves, and when he knew that the end was at hand he kissed with mad lips the cold lips of the Mermaid, and the heart that was within him brake.
And as through the fulness of his love his heart did break, the Soul found an entrance and entered in, and was one with him even as before.
And the sea covered the young Fisherman with its waves.
And in the morning the Priest went forth to bless the sea, for it had been troubled.
And with him went the monks and the musicians, and the candle–bearers, and the swingers of censers, and a great company.
And when the Priest reached the shore he saw the young Fisherman lying drowned in the surf, and clasped in his arms was the body of the little Mermaid.
And he drew back frowning, and having made the sign of the cross, he cried aloud and said, 'I will not bless the sea nor anything that is in it.
Accursed be the Sea–folk, and accursed be all they who traffic with them.
And as for him who for love’s sake forsook God, and so lieth here with his leman slain by God’s judgment, take up his body and the body of his leman, and bury them in the corner of the Field of the Fullers, and set no mark above them, nor sign of any kind, that none may know the place of their resting.
For accursed were they in their lives, and accursed shall they be in their deaths also.'
And the people did as he commanded them, and in the corner of the Field of the Fullers, where no sweet herbs grew, they dug a deep pit, and laid the dead things within it.
And when the third year was over, and on a day that was a holy day, the Priest went up to the chapel, that he might show to the people the wounds of the Lord, and speak to them about the wrath of God.
And when he had robed himself with his robes, and entered in and bowed himself before the altar, he saw that the altar was covered with strange flowers that never had been seen before.
Strange were they to look at, and of curious beauty, and their beauty troubled him, and their odour was sweet in his nostrils.
And he felt glad, and understood not why he was glad.
And after that he had opened the tabernacle, and incensed the monstrance that was in it, and shown the fair wafer to the people, and hid it again behind the veil of veils, he began to speak to the people, desiring to speak to them of the wrath of God.
But the beauty of the white flowers troubled him, and their odour was sweet in his nostrils, and there came another word into his lips, and he spake not of the wrath of God, but of the God whose name is Love.
And why he so spake, he knew not.
And when he had finished his word the people wept, and the Priest went back to the sacristy, and his eyes were full of tears.
And the deacons came in and began to unrobe him, and took from him the alb and the girdle, the maniple and the stole.
And he stood as one in a dream.
And after that they had unrobed him, he looked at them and said, 'What are the flowers that stand on the altar, and whence do they come?'
And they answered him, 'What flowers they are we cannot tell, but they come from the corner of the Fullers' Field.'
And the Priest trembled, and returned to his own house and prayed.
And in the morning, while it was still dawn, he went forth with the monks and the musicians, and the candle–bearers and the swingers of censers, and a great company, and came to the shore of the sea, and blessed the sea, and all the wild things that are in it.
The Fauns also he blessed, and the little things that dance in the woodland, and the bright–eyed things that peer through the leaves.
All the things in God’s world he blessed, and the people were filled with joy and wonder.
Yet never again in the corner of the Fullers' Field grew flowers of any kind, but the field remained barren even as before.
Nor came the Sea–folk into the bay as they had been wont to do, for they went to another part of the sea.

THE STAR–CHILD
[TO MISS MARGOT TENNANT—MRS. ASQUITH]
Once upon a time two poor Woodcutters were making their way home through a great pine–forest.
It was winter, and a night of bitter cold.
The snow lay thick upon the ground, and upon the branches of the trees: the frost kept snapping the little twigs on either side of them, as they passed: and when they came to the Mountain–Torrent she was hanging motionless in air, for the Ice–King had kissed her.
So cold was it that even the animals and the birds did not know what to make of it.
'Ugh!' snarled the Wolf, as he limped through the brushwood with his tail between his legs, 'this is perfectly monstrous weather.
Why doesn’t the Government look to it?'
'Weet! weet! weet!' twittered the green Linnets, 'the old Earth is dead and they have laid her out in her white shroud.'
'The Earth is going to be married, and this is her bridal dress,' whispered the Turtle–doves to each other.
Their little pink feet were quite frost–bitten, but they felt that it was their duty to take a romantic view of the situation.
'Nonsense!' growled the Wolf.
'I tell you that it is all the fault of the Government, and if you don’t believe me I shall eat you.' The Wolf had a thoroughly practical mind, and was never at a loss for a good argument.
'Well, for my own part,' said the Woodpecker, who was a born philosopher, 'I don’t care an atomic theory for explanations.
If a thing is so, it is so, and at present it is terribly cold.'
Terribly cold it certainly was.
The little Squirrels, who lived inside the tall fir–tree, kept rubbing each other’s noses to keep themselves warm, and the Rabbits curled themselves up in their holes, and did not venture even to look out of doors.
The only people who seemed to enjoy it were the great horned Owls.
Their feathers were quite stiff with rime, but they did not mind, and they rolled their large yellow eyes, and called out to each other across the forest, 'Tu–whit!
Tu–whoo! Tu–whit! Tu–whoo! what delightful weather we are having!'
On and on went the two Woodcutters, blowing lustily upon their fingers, and stamping with their huge iron–shod boots upon the caked snow.
Once they sank into a deep drift, and came out as white as millers are, when the stones are grinding; and once they slipped on the hard smooth ice where the marsh–water was frozen, and their faggots fell out of their bundles, and they had to pick them up and bind them together again; and once they thought that they had lost their way, and a great terror seized on them, for they knew that the Snow is cruel to those who sleep in her arms.
But they put their trust in the good Saint Martin, who watches over all travellers, and retraced their steps, and went warily, and at last they reached the outskirts of the forest, and saw, far down in the valley beneath them, the lights of the village in which they dwelt.
So overjoyed were they at their deliverance that they laughed aloud, and the Earth seemed to them like a flower of silver, and the Moon like a flower of gold.
Yet, after that they had laughed they became sad, for they remembered their poverty, and one of them said to the other, 'Why did we make merry, seeing that life is for the rich, and not for such as we are?
Better that we had died of cold in the forest, or that some wild beast had fallen upon us and slain us.'
'Truly,' answered his companion, 'much is given to some, and little is given to others.
Injustice has parcelled out the world, nor is there equal division of aught save of sorrow.'
But as they were bewailing their misery to each other this strange thing happened.
There fell from heaven a very bright and beautiful star.
It slipped down the side of the sky, passing by the other stars in its course, and, as they watched it wondering, it seemed to them to sink behind a clump of willow–trees that stood hard by a little sheepfold no more than a stone’s–throw away.
'Why! there is a crook of gold for whoever finds it,' they cried, and they set to and ran, so eager were they for the gold.
And one of them ran faster than his mate, and outstripped him, and forced his way through the willows, and came out on the other side, and lo! there was indeed a thing of gold lying on the white snow.
So he hastened towards it, and stooping down placed his hands upon it, and it was a cloak of golden tissue, curiously wrought with stars, and wrapped in many folds.
And he cried out to his comrade that he had found the treasure that had fallen from the sky, and when his comrade had come up, they sat them down in the snow, and loosened the folds of the cloak that they might divide the pieces of gold.
But, alas! no gold was in it, nor silver, nor, indeed, treasure of any kind, but only a little child who was asleep.
And one of them said to the other: 'This is a bitter ending to our hope, nor have we any good fortune, for what doth a child profit to a man?
Let us leave it here, and go our way, seeing that we are poor men, and have children of our own whose bread we may not give to another.'
But his companion answered him: 'Nay, but it were an evil thing to leave the child to perish here in the snow, and though I am as poor as thou art, and have many mouths to feed, and but little in the pot, yet will I bring it home with me, and my wife shall have care of it.'
So very tenderly he took up the child, and wrapped the cloak around it to shield it from the harsh cold, and made his way down the hill to the village, his comrade marvelling much at his foolishness and softness of heart.
And when they came to the village, his comrade said to him, 'Thou hast the child, therefore give me the cloak, for it is meet that we should share.'
But he answered him: 'Nay, for the cloak is neither mine nor thine, but the child’s only,' and he bade him Godspeed, and went to his own house and knocked.
And when his wife opened the door and saw that her husband had returned safe to her, she put her arms round his neck and kissed him, and took from his back the bundle of faggots, and brushed the snow off his boots, and bade him come in.
But he said to her, 'I have found something in the forest, and I have brought it to thee to have care of it,' and he stirred not from the threshold.
'What is it?' she cried.
'Show it to me, for the house is bare, and we have need of many things.'
And he drew the cloak back, and showed her the sleeping child.
'Alack, goodman!' she murmured, 'have we not children of our own, that thou must needs bring a changeling to sit by the hearth?
And who knows if it will not bring us bad fortune?
And how shall we tend it?' And she was wroth against him.
'Nay, but it is a Star–Child,' he answered; and he told her the strange manner of the finding of it.
But she would not be appeased, but mocked at him, and spoke angrily, and cried: 'Our children lack bread, and shall we feed the child of another?
Who is there who careth for us?
And who giveth us food?'
'Nay, but God careth for the sparrows even, and feedeth them,' he answered.
'Do not the sparrows die of hunger in the winter?' she asked. 'And is it not winter now?'
And the man answered nothing, but stirred not from the threshold.
And a bitter wind from the forest came in through the open door, and made her tremble, and she shivered, and said to him: 'Wilt thou not close the door?
There cometh a bitter wind into the house, and I am cold.'
'Into a house where a heart is hard cometh there not always a bitter wind?' he asked.
And the woman answered him nothing, but crept closer to the fire.
And after a time she turned round and looked at him, and her eyes were full of tears.
And he came in swiftly, and placed the child in her arms, and she kissed it, and laid it in a little bed where the youngest of their own children was lying.
And on the morrow the Woodcutter took the curious cloak of gold and placed it in a great chest, and a chain of amber that was round the child’s neck his wife took and set it in the chest also.
So the Star–Child was brought up with the children of the Woodcutter, and sat at the same board with them, and was their playmate.
And every year he became more beautiful to look at, so that all those who dwelt in the village were filled with wonder, for, while they were swarthy and black–haired, he was white and delicate as sawn ivory, and his curls were like the rings of the daffodil.
His lips, also, were like the petals of a red flower, and his eyes were like violets by a river of pure water, and his body like the narcissus of a field where the mower comes not.
Yet did his beauty work him evil. For he grew proud, and cruel, and selfish.
The children of the Woodcutter, and the other children of the village, he despised, saying that they were of mean parentage, while he was noble, being sprang from a Star, and he made himself master over them, and called them his servants.
No pity had he for the poor, or for those who were blind or maimed or in any way afflicted, but would cast stones at them and drive them forth on to the highway, and bid them beg their bread elsewhere, so that none save the outlaws came twice to that village to ask for alms.
Indeed, he was as one enamoured of beauty, and would mock at the weakly and ill–favoured, and make jest of them; and himself he loved, and in summer, when the winds were still, he would lie by the well in the priest’s orchard and look down at the marvel of his own face, and laugh for the pleasure he had in his fairness.
Often did the Woodcutter and his wife chide him, and say: 'We did not deal with thee as thou dealest with those who are left desolate, and have none to succour them.
Wherefore art thou so cruel to all who need pity?'
Often did the old priest send for him, and seek to teach him the love of living things, saying to him: 'The fly is thy brother.
Do it no harm.
The wild birds that roam through the forest have their freedom.
Snare them not for thy pleasure.
God made the blind–worm and the mole, and each has its place.
Who art thou to bring pain into God’s world?
Even the cattle of the field praise Him.'
But the Star–Child heeded not their words, but would frown and flout, and go back to his companions, and lead them.
And his companions followed him, for he was fair, and fleet of foot, and could dance, and pipe, and make music.
And wherever the Star–Child led them they followed, and whatever the Star–Child bade them do, that did they.
And when he pierced with a sharp reed the dim eyes of the mole, they laughed, and when he cast stones at the leper they laughed also.
And in all things he ruled them, and they became hard of heart even as he was.
Now there passed one day through the village a poor beggar–woman.
Her garments were torn and ragged, and her feet were bleeding from the rough road on which she had travelled, and she was in very evil plight.
And being weary she sat her down under a chestnut–tree to rest.
But when the Star–Child saw her, he said to his companions, 'See! There sitteth a foul beggar–woman under that fair and green–leaved tree.
Come, let us drive her hence, for she is ugly and ill– favoured.'
So he came near and threw stones at her, and mocked her, and she looked at him with terror in her eyes, nor did she move her gaze from him.
And when the Woodcutter, who was cleaving logs in a haggard hard by, saw what the Star–Child was doing, he ran up and rebuked him, and said to him: 'Surely thou art hard of heart and knowest not mercy, for what evil has this poor woman done to thee that thou shouldst treat her in this wise?'
And the Star–Child grew red with anger, and stamped his foot upon the ground, and said, 'Who art thou to question me what I do?
I am no son of thine to do thy bidding.'
'Thou speakest truly,' answered the Woodcutter, 'yet did I show thee pity when I found thee in the forest.'
And when the woman heard these words she gave a loud cry, and fell into a swoon.
And the Woodcutter carried her to his own house, and his wife had care of her, and when she rose up from the swoon into which she had fallen, they set meat and drink before her, and bade her have comfort.
But she would neither eat nor drink, but said to the Woodcutter, 'Didst thou not say that the child was found in the forest?
And was it not ten years from this day?'
And the Woodcutter answered, 'Yea, it was in the forest that I found him, and it is ten years from this day.'
'And what signs didst thou find with him?' she cried.
'Bare he not upon his neck a chain of amber?
Was not round him a cloak of gold tissue broidered with stars?'
'Truly,' answered the Woodcutter, 'it was even as thou sayest.'
And he took the cloak and the amber chain from the chest where they lay, and showed them to her.
And when she saw them she wept for joy, and said, 'He is my little son whom I lost in the forest.
I pray thee send for him quickly, for in search of him have I wandered over the whole world.'
So the Woodcutter and his wife went out and called to the Star–Child, and said to him, 'Go into the house, and there shalt thou find thy mother, who is waiting for thee.'
So he ran in, filled with wonder and great gladness.
But when he saw her who was waiting there, he laughed scornfully and said, 'Why, where is my mother?
For I see none here but this vile beggar–woman.'
And the woman answered him, 'I am thy mother.'
'Thou art mad to say so,' cried the Star–Child angrily. 
'I am no son of thine, for thou art a beggar, and ugly, and in rags.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thy foul face no more.'
'Nay, but thou art indeed my little son, whom I bare in the forest,' she cried, and she fell on her knees, and held out her arms to him.
'The robbers stole thee from me, and left thee to die,' she murmured, 'but I recognised thee when I saw thee, and the signs also have I recognised, the cloak of golden tissue and the amber chain.
Therefore I pray thee come with me, for over the whole world have I wandered in search of thee.
Come with me, my son, for I have need of thy love.'
But the Star–Child stirred not from his place, but shut the doors of his heart against her, nor was there any sound heard save the sound of the woman weeping for pain.
And at last he spoke to her, and his voice was hard and bitter.
'If in very truth thou art my mother,' he said, 'it had been better hadst thou stayed away, and not come here to bring me to shame, seeing that I thought I was the child of some Star, and not a beggar’s child, as thou tellest me that I am.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thee no more.'
'Alas! my son,' she cried, 'wilt thou not kiss me before I go?
For I have suffered much to find thee.'
'Nay,' said the Star–Child, 'but thou art too foul to look at, and rather would I kiss the adder or the toad than thee.'
So the woman rose up, and went away into the forest weeping bitterly, and when the Star–Child saw that she had gone, he was glad, and ran back to his playmates that he might play with them.
But when they beheld him coming, they mocked him and said, 'Why, thou art as foul as the toad, and as loathsome as the adder.
Get thee hence, for we will not suffer thee to play with us,' and they drave him out of the garden.
And the Star–Child frowned and said to himself, 'What is this that they say to me?
I will go to the well of water and look into it, and it shall tell me of my beauty.'
So he went to the well of water and looked into it, and lo! his face was as the face of a toad, and his body was sealed like an adder.
And he flung himself down on the grass and wept, and said to himself, 'Surely this has come upon me by reason of my sin.
For I have denied my mother, and driven her away, and been proud, and cruel to her.
Wherefore I will go and seek her through the whole world, nor will I rest till I have found her.'
And there came to him the little daughter of the Woodcutter, and she put her hand upon his shoulder and said, 'What doth it matter if thou hast lost thy comeliness?
Stay with us, and I will not mock at thee.'
And he said to her, 'Nay, but I have been cruel to my mother, and as a punishment has this evil been sent to me.
Wherefore I must go hence, and wander through the world till I find her, and she give me her forgiveness.'
So he ran away into the forest and called out to his mother to come to him, but there was no answer.
All day long he called to her, and, when the sun set he lay down to sleep on a bed of leaves, and the birds and the animals fled from him, for they remembered his cruelty, and he was alone save for the toad that watched him, and the slow adder that crawled past.
And in the morning he rose up, and plucked some bitter berries from the trees and ate them, and took his way through the great wood, weeping sorely.
And of everything that he met he made inquiry if perchance they had seen his mother.
He said to the Mole, 'Thou canst go beneath the earth. Tell me, is my mother there?'
And the Mole answered, 'Thou hast blinded mine eyes.
How should I know?'
He said to the Linnet, 'Thou canst fly over the tops of the tall trees, and canst see the whole world.
Tell me, canst thou see my mother?'
And the Linnet answered, 'Thou hast clipt my wings for thy pleasure.
How should I fly?'
And to the little Squirrel who lived in the fir–tree, and was lonely, he said, 'Where is my mother?'
And the Squirrel answered, 'Thou hast slain mine.
Dost thou seek to slay thine also?'
And the Star–Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of God’s things, and went on through the forest, seeking for the beggar–woman.
And on the third day he came to the other side of the forest and went down into the plain.
And when he passed through the villages the children mocked him, and threw stones at him, and the carlots would not suffer him even to sleep in the byres lest he might bring mildew on the stored corn, so foul was he to look at, and their hired men drave him away, and there was none who had pity on him.
Nor could he hear anywhere of the beggar–woman who was his mother, though for the space of three years he wandered over the world, and often seemed to see her on the road in front of him, and would call to her, and run after her till the sharp flints made his feet to bleed.
But overtake her he could not, and those who dwelt by the way did ever deny that they had seen her, or any like to her, and they made sport of his sorrow.
For the space of three years he wandered over the world, and in the world there was neither love nor loving–kindness nor charity for him, but it was even such a world as he had made for himself in the days of his great pride.
And one evening he came to the gate of a strong–walled city that stood by a river, and, weary and footsore though he was, he made to enter in.
But the soldiers who stood on guard dropped their halberts across the entrance, and said roughly to him, 'What is thy business in the city?'
'I am seeking for my mother,' he answered, 'and I pray ye to suffer me to pass, for it may be that she is in this city.'
But they mocked at him, and one of them wagged a black beard, and set down his shield and cried, 'Of a truth, thy mother will not be merry when she sees thee, for thou art more ill–favoured than the toad of the marsh, or the adder that crawls in the fen.
Get thee gone.
Get thee gone.
Thy mother dwells not in this city.'
And another, who held a yellow banner in his hand, said to him, 'Who is thy mother, and wherefore art thou seeking for her?'
And he answered, 'My mother is a beggar even as I am, and I have treated her evilly, and I pray ye to suffer me to pass that she may give me her forgiveness, if it be that she tarrieth in this city.'
But they would not, and pricked him with their spears.
And, as he turned away weeping, one whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet couched a lion that had wings, came up and made inquiry of the soldiers who it was who had sought entrance.
And they said to him, 'It is a beggar and the child of a beggar, and we have driven him away.'
'Nay,' he cried, laughing, 'but we will sell the foul thing for a slave, and his price shall be the price of a bowl of sweet wine.'
And an old and evil–visaged man who was passing by called out, and said, 'I will buy him for that price,' and, when he had paid the price, he took the Star–Child by the hand and led him into the city.
And after that they had gone through many streets they came to a little door that was set in a wall that was covered with a pomegranate tree.
And the old man touched the door with a ring of graved jasper and it opened, and they went down five steps of brass into a garden filled with black poppies and green jars of burnt clay.
And the old man took then from his turban a scarf of figured silk, and bound with it the eyes of the Star–Child, and drave him in front of him.
And when the scarf was taken off his eyes, the Star–Child found himself in a dungeon, that was lit by a lantern of horn.
And the old man set before him some mouldy bread on a trencher and said, 'Eat,' and some brackish water in a cup and said, 'Drink,' and when he had eaten and drunk, the old man went out, locking the door behind him and fastening it with an iron chain.
And on the morrow the old man, who was indeed the subtlest of the magicians of Libya and had learned his art from one who dwelt in the tombs of the Nile, came in to him and frowned at him, and said, 'In a wood that is nigh to the gate of this city of Giaours there are three pieces of gold.
One is of white gold, and another is of yellow gold, and the gold of the third one is red.
To–day thou shalt bring me the piece of white gold, and if thou bringest it not back, I will beat thee with a hundred stripes.
Get thee away quickly, and at sunset I will be waiting for thee at the door of the garden.
See that thou bringest the white gold, or it shall go ill with thee, for thou art my slave, and I have bought thee for the price of a bowl of sweet wine.'
And he bound the eyes of the Star–Child with the scarf of figured silk, and led him through the house, and through the garden of poppies, and up the five steps of brass.
And having opened the little door with his ring he set him in the street.
And the Star–Child went out of the gate of the city, and came to the wood of which the Magician had spoken to him.
Now this wood was very fair to look at from without, and seemed full of singing birds and of sweet–scented flowers, and the Star–Child entered it gladly.
Yet did its beauty profit him little, for wherever he went harsh briars and thorns shot up from the ground and encompassed him, and evil nettles stung him, and the thistle pierced him with her daggers, so that he was in sore distress. 
Nor could he anywhere find the piece of white gold of which the Magician had spoken, though he sought for it from morn to noon, and from noon to sunset.
And at sunset he set his face towards home, weeping bitterly, for he knew what fate was in store for him.
But when he had reached the outskirts of the wood, he heard from a thicket a cry as of some one in pain.
And forgetting his own sorrow he ran back to the place, and saw there a little Hare caught in a trap that some hunter had set for it.
And the Star–Child had pity on it, and released it, and said to it, 'I am myself but a slave, yet may I give thee thy freedom.'
And the Hare answered him, and said: 'Surely thou hast given me freedom, and what shall I give thee in return?'
And the Star–Child said to it, 'I am seeking for a piece of white gold, nor can I anywhere find it, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me.'
'Come thou with me,' said the Hare, 'and I will lead thee to it, for I know where it is hidden, and for what purpose.'
So the Star–Child went with the Hare, and lo! in the cleft of a great oak–tree he saw the piece of white gold that he was seeking.
And he was filled with joy, and seized it, and said to the Hare, 'The service that I did to thee thou hast rendered back again many times over, and the kindness that I showed thee thou hast repaid a hundred–fold.'
'Nay,' answered the Hare, 'but as thou dealt with me, so I did deal with thee,' and it ran away swiftly, and the Star–Child went towards the city.
Now at the gate of the city there was seated one who was a leper.
Over his face hung a cowl of grey linen, and through the eyelets his eyes gleamed like red coals.
And when he saw the Star–Child coming, he struck upon a wooden bowl, and clattered his bell, and called out to him, and said, 'Give me a piece of money, or I must die of hunger.
For they have thrust me out of the city, and there is no one who has pity on me.'
'Alas!' cried the Star–Child, 'I have but one piece of money in my wallet, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me, for I am his slave.'
But the leper entreated him, and prayed of him, till the Star–Child had pity, and gave him the piece of white gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and brought him in, and said to him, 'Hast thou the piece of white gold?'
And the Star–Child answered, 'I have it not.'
So the Magician fell upon him, and beat him, and set before him an empty trencher, and said, 'Eat,' and an empty cup, and said, 'Drink,' and flung him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, 'If to–day thou bringest me not the piece of yellow gold, I will surely keep thee as my slave, and give thee three hundred stripes.'
So the Star–Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece of yellow gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at sunset he sat him down and began to weep, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare that he had rescued from the trap, And the Hare said to him, 'Why art thou weeping?
And what dost thou seek in the wood?'
And the Star–Child answered, 'I am seeking for a piece of yellow gold that is hidden here, and if I find it not my master will beat me, and keep me as a slave.'
'Follow me,' cried the Hare, and it ran through the wood till it came to a pool of water.
And at the bottom of the pool the piece of yellow gold was lying.
'How shall I thank thee?' said the Star–Child, 'for lo! this is the second time that you have succoured me.'
'Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,' said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star–Child took the piece of yellow gold, and put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city.
But the leper saw him coming, and ran to meet him, and knelt down and cried, 'Give me a piece of money or I shall die of hunger.'
And the Star–Child said to him, 'I have in my wallet but one piece of yellow gold, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me and keep me as his slave.'
But the leper entreated him sore, so that the Star–Child had pity on him, and gave him the piece of yellow gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and brought him in, and said to him, 'Hast thou the piece of yellow gold?'
And the Star–Child said to him, 'I have it not.'
So the Magician fell upon him, and beat him, and loaded him with chains, and cast him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, 'If to–day thou bringest me the piece of red gold I will set thee free, but if thou bringest it not I will surely slay thee.'
So the Star–Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece of red gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at evening he sat him down and wept, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare.
And the Hare said to him, 'The piece of red gold that thou seekest is in the cavern that is behind thee.
Therefore weep no more but be glad.'
'How shall I reward thee?' cried the Star–Child, 'for lo! this is the third time thou hast succoured me.'
'Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,' said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star–Child entered the cavern, and in its farthest corner he found the piece of red gold.
So he put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city.
And the leper seeing him coming, stood in the centre of the road, and cried out, and said to him, 'Give me the piece of red money, or I must die,' and the Star–Child had pity on him again, and gave him the piece of red gold, saying, 'Thy need is greater than mine.'
Yet was his heart heavy, for he knew what evil fate awaited him.
But lo! as he passed through the gate of the city, the guards bowed down and made obeisance to him, saying, 'How beautiful is our lord!' and a crowd of citizens followed him, and cried out, 'Surely there is none so beautiful in the whole world!' so that the Star–Child wept, and said to himself, 'They are mocking me, and making light of my misery.'
And so large was the concourse of the people, that he lost the threads of his way, and found himself at last in a great square, in which there was a palace of a King.
And the gate of the palace opened, and the priests and the high officers of the city ran forth to meet him, and they abased themselves before him, and said, 'Thou art our lord for whom we have been waiting, and the son of our King.'
And the Star–Child answered them and said, 'I am no king’s son, but the child of a poor beggar–woman.
And how say ye that I am beautiful, for I know that I am evil to look at?'
Then he, whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet crouched a lion that had wings, held up a shield, and cried, 'How saith my lord that he is not beautiful?'
And the Star–Child looked, and lo! his face was even as it had been, and his comeliness had come back to him, and he saw that in his eyes which he had not seen there before.
And the priests and the high officers knelt down and said to him, 'It was prophesied of old that on this day should come he who was to rule over us.
Therefore, let our lord take this crown and this sceptre, and be in his justice and mercy our King over us.'
But he said to them, 'I am not worthy, for I have denied the mother who bare me, nor may I rest till I have found her, and known her forgiveness.
Therefore, let me go, for I must wander again over the world, and may not tarry here, though ye bring me the crown and the sceptre.'
And as he spake he turned his face from them towards the street that led to the gate of the city, and lo!
Amongst the crowd that pressed round the soldiers, he saw the beggar–woman who was his mother, and at her side stood the leper, who had sat by the road.
And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he ran over, and kneeling down he kissed the wounds on his mother’s feet, and wet them with his tears.
He bowed his head in the dust, and sobbing, as one whose heart might break, he said to her: 'Mother, I denied thee in the hour of my pride.
Accept me in the hour of my humility.
Mother, I gave thee hatred.
Do thou give me love.
Mother, I rejected thee.
Receive thy child now.'
But the beggar–woman answered him not a word.
And he reached out his hands, and clasped the white feet of the leper, and said to him: 'Thrice did I give thee of my mercy.
Bid my mother speak to me once.'
But the leper answered him not a word.
And he sobbed again and said: 'Mother, my suffering is greater than I can bear.
Give me thy forgiveness, and let me go back to the forest.'
And the beggar–woman put her hand on his head, and said to him, 'Rise,' and the leper put his hand on his head, and said to him, 'Rise,' also.
And he rose up from his feet, and looked at them, and lo! they were a King and a Queen.
And the Queen said to him, 'This is thy father whom thou hast succoured.'
And the King said, 'This is thy mother whose feet thou hast washed with thy tears.'
And they fell on his neck and kissed him, and brought him into the palace and clothed him in fair raiment, and set the crown upon his head, and the sceptre in his hand, and over the city that stood by the river he ruled, and was its lord.
Much justice and mercy did he show to all, and the evil Magician he banished, and to the Woodcutter and his wife he sent many rich gifts, and to their children he gave high honour.
Nor would he suffer any to be cruel to bird or beast, but taught love and loving–kindness and charity, and to the poor he gave bread, and to the naked he gave raiment, and there was peace and plenty in the land.
Yet ruled he not long, so great had been his suffering, and so bitter the fire of his testing, for after the space of three years he died.
And he who came after him ruled evilly.
